[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
Good afternoon everyone. Let's make a start.

So today's lecture is on making art speak. It's the penultimate lecture in this series on art and imagination.

So far in this series, we've covered writing the Renaissance and gallery going.

And next week will be the final lecture on Art for Art's Sake.

Question mark. Today's lecture is all about close encounters between poets and paintings.

And as I said at the beginning of this series,

it's intended partly to widen your knowledge of the period and introduce you to texts you might not have encountered in your college teaching,

but it's also designed to provide you with new perspectives on topics that you might have studied from a slightly different angle.

So I've said that the first lecture would be particularly useful for thinking about the Victorians relationship to history.

Last week's lecture touched on questions about realism, urban experience,

journalism and the material in this week's lecture could help you out with possible questions on poetic form,

translation, sound and silence, as well as more direct questions about the relationship between literature and visual art.

Poems about pictures enjoyed a considerable vogue in the Victorian and Edwardian period.

Never before had so many poems been written about pictures, and the genre became a site of extraordinary experimental energy,

and those experiments would go on to spark the imaginations of many 20th and 21st century poets who followed in their wake.

The name of that particular genre was both a very old term, and one with a relatively new kind of meaning.

Acrostic poetry. Poetry engaged in the practice of actresses.

The term actresses comes from the ancient Greek verb phrasing, meaning to speak out.

In classical rhetoric, actresses refer to any kind of description that appeal to the mind's eye, and what was aimed at was vividness or energy.

The root of our modern word energy.

From around the Victorian period, however, actresses started to refer more specifically to a verbal account of a work of visual art.

So not just a lively description of something seen, but a literary response to a picture, a drawing, a sculpture, a photograph.

And today I want to look at a range of examples from Dante Gabriel Rossetti, the Pre-Raphaelite painter poet Michael Fields,

the pen name adopted by Catherine Bradley and Edith Cooper in the middle there,

and another, Edith Edith Wharton, better known as a novelist,

the author of The Age of Innocence, the House of mirth, but also some fine acrostic poems.

So I'll say more about those in a moment.

But first, I want to establish some historical and theoretical reference points to sharpen our thinking about these examples.

And the first,

perhaps disarmingly straightforward question we might want to ask about these sort of poems is what does the poet see or seek in the work of art?

What kind of stance does the poem take towards the artwork?

Is it an attempt to master it or to rival it, to emulate it, or to transform it?

Is it engaged in a kind of struggle with the artwork, or is it offering it a kind of sociability?

Friendship? Love? Gratitude? And what about its mode of address?

Does the poem speak to the artwork? Is it an apostrophe?

An address to the work, or does it speak for the artwork?

Is it a kind of Prosser peer lending the silent object a voice?

To put that is another way, the grammar of emphasis is very important.

Does the artwork occupy the first person, the second person, or the third person in this poem?

Where is the speaker in relation to the object? Are they speaking from inside the picture or are they speaking as the picture?

Are they speaking to or about the picture? Are they pronouncing it, pronouncing upon it from a detached and impersonal perspective?

Or do we get the impression of an individual encounter? And if so, is the picture in front of them, or is it conjured by memory?

If it's in front of them, how close do they get? And last but not least, where is the reader placed in relation to the speaker or speaker's?

And of course, all these things might change in the course of a single poem.

There are two major historical traditions of thinking about exorcists that can help sharpen these questions.

One accentuates the similarities between poetry and visual art.

The other emphasises the differences. The first way of thinking takes its motto from the Roman poet Horace put picture to poses, as is painting.

So is poetry. Words and pigments are both tools of expression, both means of representation.

They can both be used to depict objects, people, events, ideas, emotions.

They can both transport us into a vividly imagined time or place or state of mind,

and so they can be seen as pursuing analogous goals in analogous ways.

The way this gets expressed, especially in the Renaissance, is that these arts are sisters.

Bits of inaccuracies is a poem based on a painting,

a verbal representation of a visual representation in James Heffernan's usefully inclusive definition,

then does not place the poem at one further remove from what's being represented in the painting.

One of the questions that acrostic poetry wrangles with is which art comes closer to rendering reality?

Or to put it a bit more cautiously. What particular resources does each art have for imagining reality?

The Greek author Plutarch, writing in the second century, keeps faith with Horace's analogy while suggesting these arts have distinctive resources.

Painting is mute poetry, he says, and poetry is a speaking picture,

a line he attributes to the Greek lyric poet Simonides of Chaos, where poetry appeals to the ear, painting appeals to the eye.

So if these arts are siblings, that doesn't mean they're identical twins.

In fact, it raises the possibility of sibling rivalry.

The term that gets used to describe that rivalry in the Renaissance is paragon, the Italian word for comparison.

And this Patagonia gets articulated in especially stark and influential terms in the 18th century by the German philosopher Gotthold Ephraim Lessing,

who pushes back against Horace's model of analogy.

For Lessing, these arts belong to totally different spheres.

Poetry inhabits time, while art inhabits space.

The rule is this he writes, that succession in time is the province of the poet.

Coexistence in space. That of the artist.

Art gives us images that can be apprehended in a single moment.

It can achieve a unity and coherence not possible.

In literature, he sings where the multiplication of visual details produces only confused images.

But what's an artwork can't do for Lessing is adequately depict narrative or thought, and therefore he thinks poetry is superior to the visual arts.

As the art theorist Mitchell has observed. Lessing's characterisation was an implicitly gendered and indeed a sexist woman.

For him, paintings were like women silent, passive, beautiful, whereas poetry was like men active, thinking, noisy.

And so Lessing bequeathed a very gendered set of problems. For emphasis is the poet violating the silence and beauty of the image,

or is he making up for a kind of lack in the image, coaxing it into speech, jolting it into the world of time and agency?

Actresses such as Heffernan is dynamic and obstetric.

Delivering from the pregnant moment of visual art the extended narrative which it embryonic signifies,

the acrostic poem then makes explicit the story that is told only implicitly in the work of art according to this idea.

More generally, perhaps it brings to the surface what the artwork had sought to disguise.

Stephen Cheek suggests something along these lines the poem knows something or tells something that had been held back by the silent image.

And yet the poet is not always so confident that they they've seen through the image or got to the bottom of it.

Some poems revolve around the picture's very resistance to being known.

In any case, an acrostic poem might prefer to conceal rather than reveal aspects of the image.

It might subtract something from the picture rather than adding to it.

Every actress is, after all, a kind of interpretation.

It selects edits construed as revises, even if it tries to have the last word.

The image can make us feel that there's something words don't reach,

and an acrostic poem can make us feel that most when it strains hardest to deny it.

By the same token, poems that idolise the Medusa like powers of the image, its ability to freeze,

overwhelm and stupefy its observers can turn out as paradoxical tributes to their own disowned eloquence,

showing us just how much words can do while telling us what they can't.

So those are some rather abstract opening thoughts. And it's about time we looked at a poem not simply as an illustration of these theoretical ideas,

but as a way of testing them, complicating them, revising them if necessary.

And we might be particularly curious about how women poets deal with the burden of that very gendered legacy left behind by Lessing and his admirers.

Do they reclaim for themselves Lessing's ideas about the advantages of poetry for a female voice?

For instance, if they're writing about a picture by a male artist, perhaps especially a picture of a woman.

What do they challenge Lessing's sense of innate differences between these arts?

Do they suggest how poetry might emulate certain qualities of pictures,

or do they forego the attempt to recreate the image in words and use it instead as a provocation to reflection?

Perhaps they'll deploy questions as a way of conscripting the reader in an act of encounter and interpretation.

Or perhaps they'll put pressure on how looking is itself a temporal experience, situated unmediated in socially and historically particular ways.

One of the most comprehensive acrostic endeavours in the 19th century was a collection of poems published in 1892 under the title Site and Song.

The name of the author was given on the title page as Michael Field.

But as we've seen, this was the pen name, the authorial identity of two women, Katherine Bradley and Edith Cooper, aunt and niece and devoted lovers.

Their poetic endeavours, said Cooper. Well, like mosaic work, the mingled various product of our two brains.

Bradley and Cooper had made their name as Michael Field,

with an earlier volume of translations and elaborations of fragments by the ancient Greek poet Sappho.

And the new work was published in an ornamental limited edition.

This collection included 33 poems on 31 different pictures located in galleries across Britain and continental Europe,

including the Louvre, the Doge's Palace and Accademia in Venice.

The Fits in Florence, as well as galleries in Frankfurt, Weimar and Dresden.

Some of the paintings were very famous and recognisable, others much less so.

And the collection was published without any illustrations.

So if you wanted to compare the poems with their subjects, you'd have to make that effort yourself.

What might interpret that decision in itself as a suggestion that these poems are being offered as a kind of substitute for the pictures.

They're not just commentaries on the pictures or conversation partners with the pictures.

They're actually being offered as a kind of alternative to seeing the pictures.

So the poet William Butler Butler Yeats underestimated the challenge of this gesture when he wrote in an early review that Bradley Cooper

have preferred to work with the studious and interpretive side of the mind and write a guidebook to the picture galleries of Europe.

Instead of giving us a book full of the motions and fancies which must be crowding in upon their minds perpetually.

And yet, for all his dismissiveness, there is also something insightful about Yates's remark.

Here's one of the early poems from the collection, and notice how it's presented.

Field gives the title of the poem of the painting, then the artist, and then the location.

The National Gallery in this case. So it's rather like something you'd find in a gallery catalogue or indeed a guidebook,

both of which, as we saw last week, were being mass produced for the first time in the 19th century.

There's something therefore quite formal, quite detached and impersonal about the way these poems are being presented to us.

The poets are not giving us their own title, but the formal title of the painting,

and they're anchoring it very firmly in this particular museum setting.

That way of situating the poem continues into the first line.

Here we have the lovely mask of a Venus in the braid.

It sounds like the voice of an expert guide, someone who's taking us round a gallery.

Venus may spring into life at any moment, but here she's just a Venus, one of many.

So there's an implicit encouragement to compare this Venus with other representations of Venus across the collection.

And indeed, we find several other other Venus in sight and song with which we might compare this one Botticelli's Birth of Venus,

Botticelli's Venus and Mars, Georgina's Sleeping Venus.

So we're in the company of a learned guide standing in front of an object that they're offering to elucidate.

I get the last line of that first stanza can be read, I think, as a hint about the speaker's self-conscious role as a guide,

like Cupid in the picture, who half hides and half doth guide any actresses, half hides its subject, while it half does guide.

It draws our attention to certain things and not others.

This hint in the poem speaks to the double edged way in which fields conceive of their project.

In the preface to this collection, their aim is, on the one hand,

to express not so much what these pictures are to the poet, but rather what poetry they objectively incarnate.

The paintings have a poetry of their own, which the poet is seeking to release into language.

As Bradley wrote to her friend Mary Castello from Frankfurt.

There are deeply poetic pictures at Frankfurt Namur.

There are poems in them, and one has only to stare and wait till they give up their secret.

The method, as described in the preface, is to suppress one's own idiosyncrasies and try as hard as possible to see things from their own centre.

The encounter with the painting becomes an opportunity to escape from their habitual ways of seeing things, and imagine their way into its otherness.

Field summons of sentence from the letters of the French novelist Flaubert to describe this process.

In full effect. Discreet, so transported only person and only that here are swapped while must,

by an effort of mind, transport oneself into the characters and not draw them towards oneself.

For pets on our substitute Panthere,

and this sentence from Gustave Flaubert correspondence resumes the method of art study from which these poems arose.

And yet not even the Gustav could ultimately elude himself as a formative power in his work,

not after the pain of a lifetime directed to no other end.

Yet the effort to see things from their own centre by suppressing the habitual centralisation of the visible in ourselves,

is a process by which we eliminate or reduce increases and obtain an impression clearer, less passive, more intimate.

When such effort has been made honestly and with persistence,

even then the inevitable force of individuality must still have play and a temperament mould the purified impression.

The acrostic process that field has in mind, then, is what Anna Parejo video calls a two phased aesthetic.

There's a primary aspiration towards impersonality and a recognition that ultimately,

any effort of imagination is going to be tainted by subjectivity.

This was the very point that fields friend Walter Pater had made in his review of Flaubert's correspondence a few years earlier.

Impersonality in art. The literary ideal of Gustave Flaubert is perhaps no more possible than realism.

The artist will be felt. His subjectivity must and will colour the incidents as his very bodily eye selects the aspects of things.

It's suggested that Peter alights here on a simile about looking.

What a picture offers to the eye is both an imaginative world, the scene depicted in the picture, and a made object, the brush marks on a canvas.

Acrostic poets vary in their attentions to these two aspects of the artwork, but in their preface field places special emphasis on the latter.

The aim of this little volume is, as far as may be, to translate into verse, what the lines and colours of certain chosen pictures sing in themselves.

So the poets here are putting themselves in the humble position of a translator, trying to find words that match up to the picture.

This kind of exercise then doesn't just speak out or speak over the picture.

It first of all listens to what it might be saying, or singing and listening to what it sings means listening to how it sings.

The poetry which these pictures incarnate, then, is not simply in the subject of the story, which, after all,

could be painted in a thousand different ways, but in the exact arrangement of lines and colours on the canvas.

And in this respect, field was following the cue of Pater, who,

in his essay The School of Georgia in 1877 had claimed that it is the mistake of much popular criticism to regard poetry, music,

and painting all the various products of art as translations into different languages of one and the same fixed quantity of imaginative thought,

supplemented by certain technical qualities of colour and painting, of sound and music, of rhythmical words and poetry.

In this way the sensuous elements in art, and with it almost everything in art that is essentially artistic is made a matter of indifference.

The translations which field are proposing are not merely renderings of imaginative thought,

but attempts to capture the sensuous, expressive qualities of the picture in another medium.

So there's a challenge here to Lessing's strict division between the capacities of poetry and painting for Lessing.

You can't translate one into the other because they're fundamentally different.

And there's some truth in that, because words can't capture everything about a picture, and a picture can't do everything words can do as words do it.

But what fields suggests is that one art might nonetheless inspire another to do something new with the resources it has.

As the art historian T.J. Clark has written a painting, semantics of juxtaposition and interval may trigger a kind of syntax no one has tried before.

The all at once ness of the image is an incitement to prosody, to rhythmical experiment.

A poem, in other words, might seek to emulate the qualities that make a picture,

a picture, its silence, its stillness, its way of inhabiting an organising space.

One way in which fields poems do that is by their appearance on the printed page.

As you can see, the poems are printed with very wide margins, lots of blank space, and so they look a little bit like canvases hung on a wall.

These are poems that ask to be looked at as well as heard.

And when you're reading this book, it's as though you're walking through a gallery, an imaginary gallery you can carry in your pocket.

What about the particular poem I highlighted earlier? How might this poem emulate visual effects?

Well, let's take a look at the picture on which it's based. So here's Courageous Painting in the National Gallery.

It depicts three classical gods. We've got Venus, the goddess of love, on the left there.

Mercury, the messenger god, the God of communication, who's sitting down on the right, holding a piece of paper and pointing at it.

And then little Cupid, the God of desire, whose magic bow and arrow seems to have been confiscated by his mother,

Venus, and who's looking very intently at that piece of paper Mercury showing him.

Now, the suggestion in this painting is that Cupid is the son of Venus and Mercury,

which is actually a little bit unusual because more often Cupid was thought to be the son of Venus and Mars, the god of war.

But here his attention is focussed not on weapons but on words.

Mercury is teaching him the alphabet because in Roman mythology, Mercury was said to have invented the Latin alphabet.

So that's why this painting has sometimes been called the School of Love or the Education of Cupid.

So that's what we might call the iconography of the painting. Who's who?

Now, in terms of the formal dimensions of this painting, obviously the composition is dominated by these three figures,

and they're linked in the painting, uh, by the, um, sorry, I know, um, they're linked in the painting by the use of three main colours.

There's the golden blonde that links Venus's curls with cupids on the one hand, and with Mercury's straw hat, the potatoes on the other.

And you can see that same lustrous gold on Cupid's wings.

Indeed, if you look closely, you can see that his wings bring this gold tone together with the colours sported by each of his parents in the drapery,

sort of purpley drapery formed by Venus and the blue drapery of Mercury.

So let's turn to the point where we can see straight away that the poem is also organised by threes.

It has three stanzas, and we find that each stanza is made up of three interlacing rhymes a, b, a, c, c.

So there's a formal compositional echo there in terms of poetic structure, but the poem also uses the time bound,

world bound resources of poetry to emulate the stillness of the image, a move that the critic Wendy Steiner sees as characteristic of.

Have, an acrostic poem aspires to the temporal eternity of the stopped action painting, or laments its inability to achieve it.

What's in question here isn't then, an ordinary experience of stillness captured in art like a still life painting?

What Steiner envisions is the wish for arts to leap free of time altogether into a kind of a temporal eternity.

It's this kind of state that fascinates Keats in The Old and a Grecian Urn,

where the speaker looks at the urns depiction of a lover approaching his beloved beneath the spring foliage.

Fair use beneath the trees. Thou canst not leave thy song.

Nor ever can those trees be bare. Bold lover, never, never canst thou kiss the winning near the goal.

Yet do not grieve. She cannot fade.

Though vow has not thy bliss forever. Wilt thou love and she be fair.

Keeps his orders marked by powerful ambivalence about this, a temporal existence that the wrong people have.

On the one hand, the lover can never, never kiss. He can never fulfil his amorous intentions.

But on the other hand, the beloved will always be as fair as she is now.

It will always be. Spring, and Keats's speaker can't seem to decide whether to envy or pity these figures.

But if Keats treats this temporal experience as a theme,

we can also think about it in terms of the formal stratagems and capacities of these rival media of poetry and sculpture, poetry and painting.

The critic Murray Krieger suggests that the acrostic dimension of literature

reveals itself wherever the poem takes on the still elements of plastic form,

which we normally attribute to the spatial arts.

So we can think about how this poem uses the time bound, world bound resources of poetry to aspire to the temporal stillness of the image.

For instance, Michael Fields poem creates a kind of suspended motion from the way the syntax interacts with what we might call the cat electric lines.

The first four lines of each stanza that lack the final syllable needed to complete the metre.

That's what all catalytic means. So this poems and tetrad matter.

Dum dum dum de dum dum. But in those first four lines of each stanza, that final downbeat is missed off.

Dum de dum dum dum dum. Now, what's the effect of that?

I know you've all just been. Many of you been sitting in a lecture about metre. Well, it encourages to pause as to pause in slightly odd places.

If you were to read the first sentence as prose, we'd say, here we have the lovely mask of a Venus in the braid of bright oak boughs, and so on.

Whereas the poem makes us say, here we have the lovely mask of a Venus in the braid of bright oak boughs.

Come to ask the way these pauses cut across the syntax, jarringly subordinates ordinary speech rhythms to strict aural and visual patterns,

accentuating the drawings and bringing us continually to a kind of eerie standstill at the end of each line.

I wish to transcend. The passage of time is also discernible in the poem's fascination with the poignant hour,

serene and supreme moment that the poem seeks to inhabit and prolong with the repetition of when.

When, in that last stanza, it's as if the speaker is holding on to the moment, refusing to let it go.

And yet this poem also elicits movement and narrative from courageous picture.

The calm authority of the voice is interrupted by a parenthetical leap of delight.

At the centre of the poem. Oh, the magic straws in his hat, as if they've just been noticed or appreciated at this moment.

The parenthesis reminds us then, that whatever Lessing may have said, we don't take in the whole of a picture at once.

As the art historian Michael Baxendale contends, if a picture is simultaneously available in its entirety,

looking at a picture is as temporally linear as language.

Bradley and Cooper's acquaintance, the writer Vernon Lee, suggested that, however still the picture may be,

our eyes have the pleasure of wandering over its surface and returning to it again and again.

Of course, a great picture like that Leonardo is made to be seen at several goals.

You possess the whole, but you also possess these exquisite details.

These things are made for leisurely living with not to make one bang impression with a visual image banged into your brain like a seal on wax.

This is one reason why the same picture can sustain so many different points.

Even when, like fields, the poet themselves is committed to finding the perfect translation,

because that still leaves the question of what you select the translate in the picture and the order in which you propose to translate it.

Feel themselves included two quite different poems about Botticelli's spring insights and so on.

So John Ruskin suggests no human capacity ever yet.

So the whole of a thing. But we may see more and more of it the longer we look.

Every individual temple will see something different in it. But supposing the tempers honest, all the differences are there.

Every advance in our acuteness of perception will show us something new.

But the old and first discerned thing will still be there.

Not falsified, only modified and enriched by the new perceptions.

Michael Field rarely have difficulty finding a story for the pictures they write about.

Venus, Mercury and Cupid evolves a miniature narrative from the single moments depicted in the picture.

Venus comes to ask Hermes Mercury, will he give a task?

Whereas in the painting he's already given it. The speaker then proceeds to an allegorical interpretation of the scene,

asking rhetorically, why should Cupid bother learning anything else than the art of love?

His mother's art.

Ruskin couldn't resist giving his own allegorical reading of this painting when he suggested that it ought really to be called Mercury,

trying and failing to teach Cupid how to read because he wrote love reads without letters.

It's instinctual. It can't be taught from a book. Field, though, tells a slightly different story.

The child Cupid represents how love can come between troubled lovers as a screen.

So love here, as incarnated in a child, is seen as the dissolving of tensions.

It has the power to recall these lovers to something simple and innocent and childlike,

and make their scoldings and beseeching seem empty or beside the point.

It's an inventive take on the picture. It's certainly not the only way one could think about it.

After all, Venus there is not gazing into her lover's eyes or looking down tenderly at her child.

She's staring off to the side, or perhaps even at us.

What's she thinking? That is a question that animates many of the most compelling, interesting points, including Michael Field's own poem,

a portrait where the sitter's smile endows the gazer with no tidings from the face, the very crystal clarity.

Other paintings, forms and textures makes this smile's resistance to interpretation all the stranger and more vexing.

Yet far from causing the speaker to collapse into silence, it's precisely the stone in us of this sitters gaze that spurns them on.

Edith Wharton sonnet The Apollo and Martius of Metagenome in the Louvre knows something that the figure of Martius in the picture does not,

namely, that he will very shortly be flayed alive by Apollo for daring to challenge his musical pre-eminence.

Yes. If this is a poem that relishes the chance to tell us what happens next.

It's drawn to the picture precisely by what it doesn't know.

That is how the young god Apollo can live with such bloody foreknowledge and yet remain serene.

Inscrutable, serene, serenely young God stands in presence, inaccessible, his eyes bright with the fumes of mortal sacrifice.

Divine, faltering, liar, impatient for his hands.

Far valley words. The mindless pasture lands whose sheltered paths his worshippers despise.

Slope to the small walled city where the wise move tranquilly within unfulfilled demands.

But on the hilltop, challenging the god sits.

Marcellus fluting his undaunted tune and smiling.

The god waits for seeing.

Soon the ultimate hour of him whose feet have trod that perilous eminence, his bloody swoon, his end sorrowed and unattended sword.

Apollo's presence is inaccessible to poor masses, but his serenity remains inscrutable to the poet and inscrutability.

Once again concentrated in a human face, which stands as an emblem of the otherness of art.

Or perhaps we should say that these two kinds of otherness always seem to implicate each other.

As Mitchell shrewdly suggests, the ambivalence about emphasis is grounded in our ambivalence about other people.

The sense of an unbridgeable gap between the poet and the object is a perennial source

of anxiety and fascination for acrostic poetry that's never fully to sociable,

from a worry about our separateness from other people.

Here's Michael feels land different on a painting by the 18th century artist Watteau.

He dances on a toll as light as Mercury's sweet Harold gives my message.

No, he dances on the world is his. The sunshine and his winged hat.

His eyes are round beneath the brim. To merely dance.

Where he is found is fate to him. And he was born for that.

He dances in a cloak of vermeil. And a blue gay youngster.

Underneath the oak. Come, laugh and love in vain we will.

He is a human butterfly. No soul, no kiss, no glance, no joy.

Though old enough for manhood is bliss. He is a boy who dances and must die.

What does Title Line differ from? Suggests this figure's indifference to the glittering Beaumont to which he belongs.

Summoned to attend well dressed the many gay occasions that don't concern you at all.

In the words of the Austrian poet Rilke in his poem on this picture.

Here. This indifference becomes symbolic of the picture's own inaccessibility to the world of the viewer, and vice versa.

The lines in italics could be read as the vain imploring of a viewer of this picture,

who longs to hear the never to be heard tidings that seen so near to being told,

and who desires nothing more than for this figure to step out of the canvas and leave his cruel fate behind.

Like many other acrostic poems, this one raises the question of whether the figures in the pictures are trapped,

locked in their worlds, or whether we, the viewers, are locked out.

The question might seem rarefied or even perverse, but it's one people ask all the time about their relationships with others.

What's going on with you? How do I reach you? Feel takes the thought in a sceptical direction, wondering if I can't get through.

Are you really there at all? Are other people nothing but automata?

Butterflies who merely dance and must die? By raising such questions.

The acrostic challenge presents itself not only as a technical or creative task, but one with a powerful ethical dimension,

which suggests that the experience of heart is not an activity detached from the rest of human experience, but deeply continuous with it.

Vernon Lee again. There exists an experience, she insists.

No such abstractions as aesthetic attention or aesthetic enjoyment, but merely very various states of our whole being which express themselves,

among other results, in various degrees and qualities of responsiveness to works of art.

So how do we respond to works of art can never ultimately be detached from how we respond to the world around us and the people in it?

How much attention, imagination, and enjoyment do we bring to our response?

Dante Gabriel Rossetti stole from Keats the tactic of peppering questions at the pictures he confronted.

What man or gods are these? What maidens loath?

What man's pursuit, what struggle to escape, what pipes and Tim rolls, what wild ecstasy asks kids in the old.

And the question on questions like these don't just stage a lively encounter with an alluring work of art,

they invite the reader to collaborate in the speaker's own quest for meaning and significance.

Keats's poem famously finds that significance in the thought that beauty is truth, truth, beauty.

But the centuries of criticism can testify.

This is a thought that raises many more questions than it answers, and thus hands on the enigma of the image in another form.

Making the object speak then didn't mean plucking out the heart of its mystery.

In Plato's dialogues the free dress. Socrates does not oppose, but aligns writing with the silence of painting.

You know, features. That's the strange thing about writing, which makes it truly analogous to painting.

The painter's products stand before us as though they were alive.

But if you question them, they maintain a most majestic silence.

It is the same with written words. They seem to talk to you as though they were intelligent.

But if you ask them anything about what they say from a desire to be instructed, they go on telling you just the same thing forever.

Rossetti calls the silent figures in Botticelli's Primavera Mummers mime artists who could never answer his many questions with speech.

And his affiliation of paint of the painting with mystery is to the point, since,

as Pater reminds us, the very word mystery has its origins in the idea of silence.

The Latin mysterium, meaning secret, has its origin in the Greek moustaches, meaning an initiate or recruit into a cult of mysteries.

A word itself derived from the verb mucho, meaning to shut, as in to shut lips the most days, in other words, was a person vowed to silence.

When Rossetti asks of Botticelli's picture, what mystery here is read of homage or of hope,

he is rebuked, but perhaps also instructed by the painting's reticence.

But how commands dead springs to answer and how question here these mummers of that wind weather of New year.

The painting silence is a kind of answer to his question.

It's the reader who must take responsibility for its meaning.

Reading is not, then, as in Rossetti's original question in this poem, a passive affair.

What mystery here is read but an active co-creative one, something that happens in the encounter between the picture and the speaker.

Rossetti's earlier poem Prosser, Pinner for a picture is an extraordinary testament to this idea of creative reading.

Or that he wrote the poem to accompany his painting of the same name.

So he was exploring the tragic story and situation of Prosser, Prosser, Pyne into different media.

But this actually understates the case.

Firstly, because Rossetti first wrote the sonnet in Italian and Pina before translating it into English into English.

So we've got two sonnets to compare with the picture. But secondly, because he also wrote a prosaic verses on the picture.

And thirdly, because he in fact painted no fewer than eight versions of this picture, one of which,

this one is in the Ashmolean Museum here in Oxford, although very sadly it's not on display.

Uniquely among Rossetti's picture poems, and there are a large number.

This one is written in the voice of the figure it depicts.

So rather than writing about the picture from a viewer's perspective,

it's giving voice to the doomed goddess who's been abducted from her Sicilian home, Anna by Pluto, god of the underworld.

And because she eats of the food in Hades, specifically the pomegranate seeds she's offered,

she's doomed to remain there for half of every year, which is when winter falls in the land of the living.

A far away. The light that brings cold cheer unto this walk.

One instant and no more. Admitted at my distant palace door afar the flowers of Anna.

From this drear dire fruit which tasted once.

Must thrown me here afar. Those skies from this tottering grey that chills me.

And afar. How far away the nights that shall be.

From the days that were afar from mine own self I seem and wing strange ways in thought.

And listen for a sign. And still some heart.

Until some soul doth pine. Whose sounds mine inner is fain to bring continually together.

Murmuring wounds me for the unhappy Prosser pine.

What's so remarkable about this poem is that, far from being indifferent to the viewer poet walled off from the world of the image,

the subject of this painting is listening out for what they have to say.

As Jerome McGann remarks,

the sextet develops an uncanny sense that Prosser is listening for the sounds and signs of the very poem she herself appears to be authoring,

and hence that the final line is giving us, as it were, Rossetti's own words here reported back to us from the underworld.

Prosser, being far from being self-sufficient, listens for a sign from without that will bring her closer to herself.

The poem stages an uncanny reciprocity between self and other art and imagination.

So whereas many acrostic poems explore the place of the artwork in the viewer's life where they encountered it,

what it means to them, what it does for them. This one imagines the life we can bring to the artwork.

So next, next week, we'll be asking how we should think about the relationship between art and life and

the fierce battles fought over that question in the course of the 19th century.

So that's art for art's sake. Baudelaire to Oscar Wilde.

Please do join me for that. And thank you for listening.

