[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
There we go. Uh, hello. Hi. Welcome, um, to the second of the one b core lectures, um, on literature and history.

Just two small things to cover today. Um, I'm Joe Moshenska.

I teach an English faculty.

I am, um, mostly focussed in my teaching and research on, um, early modern literature, which is to say 16th and 17th century.

Mostly that will become relevant in the latter part of the lecture.

Um, I've also got interested in, in sort of literary and critical theory of various kinds, which is why why I'm also invested in one B um, and uh.

Yeah, I think that's why I need to say this is the handout that is on canvas.

So you should be able to also get it on your screen to what to read on there.

That's easier. But I thought I'd put it here. Just so we all know that we're looking at uh, the same thing.

Um, and without further ado, I will dive in.

Um, if there's time at the end, I'll try and have a few minutes for questions.

Uh, if, if you have any. Um, but for now, I will get started.

Okay. So literature and history. I'd like to begin the lecture today with a thought experiment.

I want you to imagine that something that you have written or are about to write, then happens to survive long beyond your lifetime.

So let's say, for the sake of argument, it's not a published novel or poem,

which is something that would have been accompanied by a wealth of documentation that would help people to explain and understand it.

Let's say instead that it's something a bit more private, private, or perhaps semi-private.

At the most uncomfortable end of the spectrum of things we could imagine surviving.

Let's say it's your private diary, or it might be the maximum opus you've had hidden in your desk drawer for years.

Too nervous to show it to anyone, or it could even be one of your tutorial essays or notes towards your tutorial essay.

Whichever of these varying these varying the literary examples we choose,

let's imagine that in a in some possible future, there are still institutions recognisably like our universities,

and that there are creatures in them who undertake practices that we would still recognise as historical study and as literary criticism.

And let's say they were to stumble across your document, which was buried in a time capsule, or retrieved from the shards of an ancient hard drive.

So scarce are the traces of evidence for the details of early 20th century life as imagined.

There's been some kind of apocalyptic event that your text is seized upon for the

unique and privileged insights that it grants into the period in which she lived.

It's every word is scrutinised and argued about future.

Scholars strive to connect everything in it to everything that they knew or thought they knew about the period from, say, the year 2000 to 2050.

So the question I want to pose to you all by way of this thought experiment is the following.

Were this scenario to unfold which aspects of early 21st century life would you accept as being meaningfully relevant to your piece of writing?

So another way of asking that same question would be what are your contexts?

I've chosen to begin today's lecture on literature and history by giving some thought to the word, to the word context,

because I think it's fair to argue that this deceptively straightforward term is often the word to which students

most routinely turn when they want to bring literature and history into some kind of relation with one another,

or to be slightly more polemical about it. It's a word that allows students of literature and critics writing about literature to appear,

to postulate a relationship between literature and history while absolving themselves,

and from the responsibility of specifying or even thinking about the precise nature of this relationship.

So what I'm suggesting is, when you take what you say the word context,

you've somehow got literature over here and history over here, and you've built a bridge between them.

But you don't really need to worry too much about what the nature of that bridge actually is.

Uh, and if you and if any of you in the audience.

As long as I'm sure you do, there's nothing wrong with what I'm describing.

But if you do this as a kind of reflex, uh, that I'm sure, uh, part of the explanation for some of you at least,

will lie with the way A-levels work, and specifically with the way in which A-level assessment objectives work.

I imagine some of you are familiar, even horribly familiar, with these assessments objectives.

You're probably trying slowly to forget the traumas of having to think about everything that you wrote in relation to them.

And if you sat the Aqa exam board for A-level English, you'll probably remember the assessments.

Objective three reads.

Demonstrate understanding of the significance and influence of the context in which in which literary texts are written and received.

And that sounds like a perfectly good, and I think, laudable goal.

But my experience of reading many, many A-level essays over the years for admissions.

And just to be clear, I'm not blaming anyone's teachers for this. This is what you're asked to do by the by the exam boards.

But what tends to happen is that simply mentioning any chronologically contiguous circumstance the War of the roses,

the Industrial Revolution, the Great Depression, that the Dutch Revolution is a particular greatest hit in this area.

It's likely to earn you a tick along with the note A3 in the margin.

And the mere fact that you're in this room.

Studying English here suggests that you've probably played at least some version of this game, and you've probably played it pretty well.

Now, interestingly, a glance at the OED entry for the word context.

That's to say the Oxford English Dictionary, which I hope you're already getting into the habit of using online for any words you get interested in.

If a word strikes you in any context, whack it into the OED and see what you learn.

Um, a glance at the OED entry for context suggests that the the this routine use of it in um, in literary study,

which is to say to describe the historical non literary circumstances that surround and condition a text.

This wasn't its original or principal meaning. The word context device from the Latin for context right, meaning to weave together or to connect.

And it tended in its early uses to refer to the ways in which parts of a text related to one another, not to features outside that text.

So, for example, um, in 1641, John Milton, writing in a prose work, uh,

he described the Bible as quote that book within whose sacred context all wisdom is enfolded.

So in this example, the text is entirely self-sufficient.

Um, that the text is its own context in this.

In this sense, it doesn't need anything outside itself to aid understanding.

So I think it's worth taking seriously the fact that the word that we often use now to relate literature and history to one another,

to bring literature into relation with what is outside it, is itself an ambiguous word,

one that's changed over time, one that has referred both to the dense,

interwoven ness of a literary text with its surroundings, and to the dense, interwoven ness of a literary text with itself.

And so this etymological clue and the thought experiment with which I started, well,

I'm hoping that that gives us is a place to start this lecture with a sense of what?

With a sense of the non-obvious ness, of what a context is and how it functions.

And what I'd invite you to do, and what I really hope the payoff of the lecture will be, is to,

is to reflect a bit more and to continue reflecting on what exactly it is you're doing when you invoke a context,

and what implicit argument is being made about the relationship between literature and history in the process.

And perhaps the most, uh, dangerous critical turn of phrase that's often deployed in this area.

And it's dangerous because it feels so routine and ordinary and unremarkable is when you talk about putting something in context.

So in this turn of phrase, the context is made to sound like a snug container that provides shape and coherence to that which it contains.

Here, the relationship between text and context is something like the relationship between margarine and its tub.

But what I want to draw your attention to is the strangeness of the links we're often forging when we make claims of this sort.

And again, it's not to say don't do it. It's just as I think about what you're doing when you do it.

And that's why I wanted to begin by posing to you this question what are your or my or our or our context?

So let's go back to that poem, diary entry or tutorial essay that I imagined surviving or your your half written novel or whatever it might be.

Let's let's go back to it. Surviving into the future.

What would our imagined future scholars need to know in order to make sense of this piece of writing that is not explicitly articulated within it?

The most immediate and obvious context would be biographical ones.

Your writing could be put into the context of your age, gender, race, social class,

your parents educational and economic background, and so on and so forth.

The school you attended, the hometown you come from, the country you come from,

the languages you speak, all of these kinds of things, individual contexts. But what if we move onto a larger scale?

Is Oxford one of your contexts? Sure. And will become more so the longer you stay here.

England, Europe and all of these various contextual scales relevant to the same extent.

What about even larger or more abstract contexts within which you might be set to exist?

What about late capitalism, or the internet age, or the age of global warming?

And crucially, do you have to be aware of a context for it to count as one?

How direct and frequent a connection does it need to have to your life?

So the point I'm making here is that you might write a poem that you imagine someone in hundreds of years reading in relation to the climate crisis,

even if your poem had nothing to do with that. But that doesn't mean it's not necessarily a relevant context,

because you are operating in the world in which lots of the big scary thinking we're doing is about the climate crisis.

And it is possible that that will permeate into your turns of phrase and your ways of thinking and your frames of reference,

even if that isn't what you. Intentionally set out to do so.

Part of what I'm trying to get at here is the kind of slipperiness in terms of scale, of context and directness,

of relevance between context and text, whenever where it points to things that if you point to industrial revolution,

when you're writing about the 19th century novel,

you're arguably doing something that might have been as strange to a 19th century person author as it as the climate crisis thing would be to you.

But that's not to say that it's not necessarily relevant. So then this is just really restating what I just said.

We might be tempted to apply context to very different phenomena operating on very different scales,

and we can be very aware of how much and how often our different contexts inform our actions and their outcomes,

including the things that we might write.

I think it's probably fair to say that we are routinely and necessarily unaware of the vast majority of our context.

And so these are the two aspects of context that I really want to stress.

The first is that contexts are always multiple and varied, so any text will always have multiple contexts within which one might situate it.

And that can be or can be made relevant to it.

And second, uh, this is the other side of that coin, really is the individual awareness of these contexts is necessarily patchy and incomplete.

So I'm taking it for granted, I think in the lecture that our actions are ceaselessly informed shapes and motivated

by historical circumstances of which we are not at all or only dimly aware.

And the same will be true of the literary text that we and other people produce.

And this means, crucially and complicatedly, I think,

that we are not necessarily the sole or even the best arbiters of what are and are not our contexts.

There might be social processes or institutional structures at work that shape a person's modes

of thought and understanding in ways which in ways of which he or she remain entirely unaware,

and whose relevance she or he might fiercely deny.

As, of course, is the case when we see people fiercely refuting any complicity with structural and institutionalised sexism or racism or homophobia,

because they insist that they do not consciously adhere to sexist, racist or homophobic views.

So we can't know in advance what context will matter, will have shaped the way we and others think and exactly how.

Why have I gone on about this so long? Well, in my experience, at least,

the ways in which I'm talking about it now are not typically how context tends to get used and thought about in undergraduate writing.

And so a suggestion I want to make today is that you see paper one B,

not as a hermetically sealed exercise in exploring literary theory and criticism

that is sealed off from the work that you undertake for your term period papers.

But it's rather an opportunity, an opportunity productively,

to unsettle the assumptions that underpin an English course like Oxford's that is sliced neatly into distinct historical periods.

So it often seems obvious, for example, that knowing who happened to occupy the English or British throne at the time,

that a piece of English or British literature was written is an important prerequisite for understanding it,

and we imply that importance whenever we say the way we describe, for example,

a George Eliot novel or a Tennyson poem as Victorian, or a John Donne sermon as Jacobean.

Whether or not they mention Queen Victoria or King James,

to put such a work into context inescapably means choosing the history into which it must be put.

The minute that you invoke a king or queen's name, or the period named after them in one of your essays,

you are, whether you mean to or not, implying that the reigns of monarchs,

other units through which history should be sliced up,

and that works of literature take their historical bearing from the presiding monarch that happens to occupy the throne.

And again, I'm not saying you shouldn't do this.

I'm not saying get rid of terms like Victorian and Jacobean from your critical or historical vocabulary.

And of course, sometimes it will matter very much indeed. So if a John Donne sermon was actually delivered in front of King James,

as many of his were, it obviously will matter very much who was on the throne at the time.

But the point I'm trying to make more broadly is that the relationship between the text,

the specific history or histories that you choose to bring in and the manner in which you choose to do that need to be explored,

explained and justified. You need to be aware of the version of history within which you are unwittingly operating.

And this is partly because its mode of relation with its innumerable,

with its innumerable contexts, is part of what many literary texts are actually about.

Part of what a work of literature often does is reflect on its own relationship to the histories that produced it, and within which it is read.

Works often ask us to consider which context and history seem relevant and irrelevant to them.

And so the nature of the relationship itself, not just the information required, will differ from text to text.

I need to be considered afresh by the critic each and every time.

And that's again a problem with the putting it into context phrase is that it implies

that the text is inert and it just gets dropped into a context rather than seeing text.

As I'm going to argue. We might go on to do as agents, historical agents, things that are trying to effect forms of historical change as well.

If, for example, a work seems to want to escape from its contingent historical circumstances altogether,

as with poetry that strives towards eternal status, or painting that tends towards total, total abstraction devoid of representational content.

Well, these two are designers with long and complex histories, so the attempt to elude context has its own context.

So I've kept my discussion quite general so far. I haven't mentioned many theorists or texts,

and I've tried to be practical about it insofar as I've suggested that certain assumptions about the relationship between literature and history

frequently inform the ways that we that we find ourselves writing about literature and inform the choices of which literature we write about.

I'm going to pivot for the rest of the lecture now towards some examples, both theoretical and literary.

So the next section, I'm going to look at a couple of particularly influential theories of literary history that try in different ways,

to interrupt any straightforward sense we might have of literary works belonging in or to a given historical moment or period.

And then finally, I'm going to come back to one example, which will be an early modern poem.

Um, the places I think are distinctive and illuminating,

kind of pressure on the time frame and the historical moment to which it, or any literary work can properly be said to belong.

Okay. So again, the sort of larger, the larger horizon of this,

I guess the one of the larger takeaways for one be is to encourage you not to think about

relating literature to history as an option that you choose to do or not choose to.

It can be tempted to think about, oh, am I doing a kind of historicist reading? Am I?

Am I bringing in history or not?

Um, you know, uh, sort of as if a historicist reading is a is a theoretical option that you might choose to do as opposed to,

say, a feminist or a Marxist or a post-colonial or a post-structuralist reading.

In fact, each of these um, complex and multifaceted theoretical approaches will be predicated on a specific understanding

of what history and literature are and how they relate to and matter to one another.

So this this question of how the two relate is always, I think at play.

The question is not should I put literature in relation to history,

but rather since literature relates inescapably to many kinds and forms of history at once,

which history and which idea of history do I find it most interesting or revealing to bring into a form of productive tension with this specific text?

And the first of the major theories I want to mention to his thoughts about this point.

Um, is the American Marxist critic who died not all that long ago.

Um. Frederick Jamison, in the opening sentences of his very influential 1981 work, The Political Unconscious.

And he begins, always historic sighs. Um, good advice put things in relation to the history that produces them.

Um, I again, I'm very much in favour of that.

But what Jameson goes on to do in this work, and what makes it such an interesting work to read, I think,

is that he he makes clear that what it means to historic size is not itself particularly obvious.

It doesn't mean, for example, just pointing outwards from the text towards events or indeed monarchs.

So it's not about the just about major figures, and it's not just about major happenings.

Excuse me. And this is quite a dense paragraph now on the handout that I'm going to read and then talk you through it a little bit.

So what he does is he kind of splits this. Oh my seriousness neatly.

That's interesting. I thought I dutifully turned off all of my, um, messenger apps,

family horror stories about people's texts popping up on the big screen as they're lecturing.

But I didn't think about Siri. Um, always the star size.

He splits this into two possibilities.

Let me read this to you, and then I'll try and gloss it a little bit.

The historic slicing operation can follow two distinct paths the path of the object and the path of the subject,

the historical origin of the things themselves,

and the more intangible historicity of the concepts and categories by which we attempt to understand those things.

So the first path looks at the text in terms of the historicity of its forms and of its content,

the historical moment of emergence, of its linguistic, of its linguistic possibilities,

the situation specific function of its aesthetic, and the second part,

which would foreground the second part would foreground the interpretive categories through which we read and receive the text in question.

So what does Jamison mean by this?

I think the key point here is that a lot of what we tend to think of as historical reading probably falls under the category of,

uh, under the auspices of the first path.

So we might, for example, ask questions about the form.

What did the novel look like in the 19th century and why?

What history is about the emergence of the novel? Do we need to understand and its content?

We might look at, um, why it's representing the city in a certain way.

How how does this reflect changes in urbanisation, industrialisation and so on and so forth?

What I think he means by the second part, which she doesn't spell out as much here.

Is that. In doing all those things I've just described, we're going to be reading, understanding, thinking, trying to make sense of certain things.

The point he would want to make is that reading, understanding,

thinking and making sense are all are all actions and processes that have their own histories.

And a novel is is written not just for people who have certain kinds of familiarity with, say, 19th century London,

but also have certain shared assumptions as well as differences among those assumptions about what it means to think,

to read, to make sense of something, to follow a plot.

And so the point he's making is the thought itself has histories.

Thought itself is something that needs to be put into history. So we cannot separate historians ization of content from historic citation of um forms

and and modes by which that content is actually brought to um is actually encountered.

So the point is that historic, the historical or historicist readings are not more objective because they're rooted in empirical data about,

um, the era in which a given work was written.

We talk about some readings being more subjective or objective than others.

But what is subjective?

What counts, the subjective, what subjects are and how they function, how they use the interpretive categories through which they encounter the world.

Those are things that are themselves matters for historical scrutiny and, and um, and debate.

So to call something subjective is really I need to begin a new discussion, both historical and conceptual,

about what we mean by a subject and the historical conditions under which different forms of subjectivity emerge.

I want to move on now from, um. I won't go a lot more into what I have this looks in practice,

but I just use Jamison really as an example of the very different things that historical interpretation can mean,

and something that sounds a lot more theoretical, let's say understanding interpretive categories as itself, a dimension of historical understanding.

But I now want to move on, uh, to a couple of different conjunctions between literature and history that you might encounter.

And you're thinking about schools of literary study or modes of literary study.

I actually don't like talking about schools or methods, because this often tends to imply more coherence and unanimity, uh, than really exists.

But the area I want to talk to you about is, um, what's constantly known as new historicism.

And it was enormously influential, especially in the USA in the 80s and 90s.

Um, and New Historicist drew upon a rich array of intellectual sources.

Probably the most, uh, famous of those now is the work of Michel Foucault.

But I'd also mentioned, uh, I imagine at least some of you will have come across Africa in some contexts from you see a light,

um, another person to look into who really influenced new historicist practice,

um, is the anthropologist Clifford Gates, g r t z um, who pioneered a technique of what he called thick description in anthropological writing,

which was very influential on how neo historicist wrote.

Now, New historicist, as their name suggests, did not reject the attempt to position literature in relation to history,

but rather offered aims of a revised account of how this relationship functioned,

and this often came down to a radical recasting of the question I began with what counts as context?

So in the work of two of its most influential practitioners, Katharine Gallagher and Stephen Greenblatt,

and they co-wrote the book together called Practising New Historicism.

So in their version, New Historicism was predicated on upon a remarkably fluid account of the way in which ideas,

concepts and structures and habits of thought and feeling moved and were present within a given cultural moment.

So the subtitle of Stephen Greenblatt's book Shakespearean Negotiations,

which I have included a quotation from here, um, and which began as lectures in Oxford.

Um, the subtitle, uh, was The Circulation of Social Energy in Renaissance England.

And this idea, the circulation of social energy, nicely captures the function the new historicist tend to assign to texts.

So they argue that social energy circulates in many forms.

And one of the implications of New historicism in theory, if not always in practice,

as I'll say in the moment, was a radical, deep privileging of the of the literary text.

So works of literature for new Historicist are distinguished not by their aesthetic purity or their formal virtuosity,

as might have been the case for new critics such as new, uh, such as Clint Brooks or W.K. Wimsatt.

Rather than being a special class of text different in kind from other kinds of historical document.

Uh, New Historicist saw literary text as just particularly complex and effective distillers and purveyors of social energy.

So one of the implications of their account of this cultural poetics, as it was often called,

was that texts that were traditionally have been read only for context by historicist critics things like court records,

historical chronicles, religious tracts, travel narratives is a very important one.

These were read with the same care and attention to rhetorical and stylistic features that had typically been reserved for great poets and novelists.

So the practical implication of this stance, if you see all of these things as sort of belonging to one circulating culture of social identity,

the practical implication is that if a given set of historical events and texts could

meaningfully be positioned in relation to another set of historical events and texts,

and argued for as manifestations of the same underlying politics of culture,

then they could be read and interpretation and interpreted in relation to one another,

even if no direct relation of connection or influence could be identified or argued for between them.

Um. So.

So in a more historicist reading. To argue for a text as a relevant context to a work of literature, you typically need to show that the author did,

or at least could have been aware of the thing you're talking about, have known about the events, or read the book in question.

But for new historicist, this narrower form of historicism implies an oversimplified account of the way in which cultures produce meanings,

and they argue that seemingly unrelated events might be read as distinct expressions or manifestations of the same underlying cultural processes,

and so, stylistically speaking. The most potent and controversial tool in the new historicist critical toolkit became the anecdote.

The classic new historicist rhetorical move was to begin an essay with a striking and vividly retold moment,

typically gleaned from a non-literal text, and to tease out its various intriguing tensions and broader implications.

It would then be argued, in the course of an inch of the ensuing essay,

that these tensions and implications were also manifested in a given work of literature from the period,

and that the juxtaposition which is deliberately jarring because it asks the reader to leap

between two areas of a given epoch that they would never have thought to read as connected,

as connected with one another. This juxtaposition reveals something about the workings of this cultural moment.

So a great example of this from Shakespearean negotiations is Greenblatt's chapter in Invisible Bullets,

from which I've quoted here, which is on the subtle operations of political power in Shakespeare's history.

Plays. Greenblatt begins the essay in seeming proximity to Shakespeare with his contemporary, the playwright and poet Christopher Marlowe.

But he begins not with one of Marlowe's plays or poems, Doctor Faustus,

O'Hara of O'Hara and Leander, to which Shakespeare's writing has often been related.

He rather begins with a historical document, not a let, not a literary text at all, but the infamous notes known as the Baines Note,

in which the Elizabethan spy Richard Baynes reported Marlowe's heretical beliefs to his superiors.

He starts with this note, as he points out that this note mentions a servant of Sir Walter Raleigh's name named Heriot's,

who turns out to be the mathematician and traveller Thomas Harriot,

who was also the author of the 1588 work A Brief and True Report of the New Found Land of Virginia,

which is an influential proto colonialist account of the indigenous peoples of North America, and this chain of associations,

launches Greenblatt into a broader account of the invisible mechanisms by which political and social power function and are perpetuated,

which he gradually brings to bear on the models of kingship and surveillance operative in Shakespeare's plays.

And he kind of summarises, I won't read this whole thing, actually, but you'll see it's basically a kind of metaphorical link.

Having made this whole connection, he then says, at times we feel like we're with Harriet,

we're like Harriet, and at times we feel like we're more like the Indians, the indigenous peoples.

So the whole thing is in the service of setting up a very, a very, um, a sort of analogous structure of thinking.

There are very few, if any, mentions of Indigenous Americans in Shakespeare's history plays.

But by setting up this parallel, he seeks to convince us that these are nonetheless historical,

um, uh, features that that resonate with and, um, and illuminate one another.

So, as I said, New Historicism, uh, was enormously influential.

And you've probably absorbed some of its strategies and ways of operating without even knowing it.

If you've ever begun an essay with a striking anecdotal remark from off the beaten track,

if you've ever tried to arrest your readers attention in that way and showcase

the fact that you're approaching your main text from an idiosyncratic angle,

I've certainly done this. If you haven't done it, try it out. It's a fun way to begin an essay.

But in doing so, you're very much swimming in New Historicism. Slipstream.

And and I want to again stress, as with James, that you know, Greenblatt and Galaga.

Extremely effective and exciting ways of approaching tax.

They help to bring whole areas of culture that have been sidelined as irrelevant or secondary

to works of serious literary stature were suddenly brought into revelatory dialogue with them.

So these kind of travel writings, um, that this whole area of, for example, um, relating Shakespeare to European encounters with indigenous peoples,

that's kind of opened up once we no longer have to say, can you prove he read the texts in question?

Right. Um, and my opening thought experiment was very much in the spirit of New historicism,

asking you to think about these context that might indeed inform your your writing, your thinking, even if you're not aware of them.

Much like we might say, the fact of these encounters with, um,

non-European peoples and the proto colonisation and the incipient genocide and all those other things is going to be in Shakespeare's thought world,

even if we can't show him reading it. Um,

but I think it's become clear in the in the decade since the heyday of New Historicism that

these kind of conjunctions also have certain limits built into or associated with them.

So the radical levelling of text and context that I've just been describing, this treatment of all kinds of historical documents,

literary and non literary, as culturally poetic artefacts in their own right.

It didn't prove all that radical in practice. So while the array of non literary texts being read did expand the range of the actual,

the actual literary writers on which they were brought to bear didn't change all that much.

Shakespeare, again and again and again, Dickens and certain other key novelists in the 19th century,

and the novel in particular as a whole, tended to be privileged.

Um, even if they're being understood in new ways. Shakespeare is valued not as a timeless genius here, right, but as someone who is is a, you know,

is a remarkable genius because he crystallises and brings into view so many of the complex,

unsettling, often really disturbing features of his culture.

But nonetheless, it's still Shakespeare, the one magically who is who is doing all the mediating at all and all the crystallising.

Um, and I think also this,

this desire to equate sort of not obviously linked features of a given historical period like Shakespeare and the early colonisation of the Americas.

Um, it came just for a related reason, which is as well as reinforcing a sense of a relatively static literary canon.

It also tended to reify, which is a useful word that means to think of, or possibly something as a thing,

to turn it into a thing, a stable thing intended to reify literary periods and historical epochs.

So to postulate a cultural poetics in the way I've been describing,

which is sufficiently stable that you can see disparate texts of this kind as expressions of shared underlying tensions, fantasies, and anxieties.

This starts to look like another version of the kinds of outdated old historicism at which New historicism often took aim,

and which argued for a unified or coherent worldview or world picture for a given period.

Now. Now New Historicism rejected the neatness and the laudatory ness of these claims, but it risks, I think,

a similar flattening and homogenising of a period in history when it was actually put into practice.

So, to put bluntly, to put this bluntly, to argue that Shakespeare's histories can be related to Harriet's writings on the New World,

no matter how sophisticated the basis on which this claim is made is still to argue

for the US as belonging to and in an excessively unified and coherent period.

So I want to end this section of the lecture by, um, outlining a few recent approaches that I think have responded to New Historicism,

um, by questioning how, um, whether works relate to, uh, relate to or belong in their contexts.

And they have produced some really interesting and provocative conjunctions between literature and history,

and even more than the other things I've been talking about, these don't add up to a coherent school of thought.

I think it's because they're sort of present in lots of different areas that they have that they're so interesting.

Um, but I'm hoping I'll mention a few names that if you're interested in this kind of area,

you might then follow up, uh, for the sake of your, uh, work for this paper.

Um, and in relation to the kind of the version I just gave you of the sort of limits of new historicist thinking,

it's perhaps not surprising that the critics doing the most interesting work in this

area are not those who are developing new accounts of how texts function within,

uh, within given historical eras, but rather questioning the very manner in which a historical era as a self-contained entity tends to be understood.

There are versions of this rethinking being undertaken in um, in various ways by, uh,

that have been undertaken and are being undertaken by queer theorist, postcolonial theorist, feminist theorists, and many others.

One source on which many of them draw, um, that doesn't fit into any any one of these schools is the rampantly eclectic,

meandering and often lyrical thoughts of the French philosopher Michel Serre.

Um, whose from whom? I've quoted here.

Sorry. Um. In an interview conducted in 1991,

sir questioned the very notion of time as a linear progression and of the existence

of stable and separate eras that is predicated upon such an understanding.

Time, he argued, does not always flow according to a line.

This is number four, but rather according to an extraordinarily complex mixture,

as though it reflected stopping points, ruptures, deep wells, chimneys of thunderous acceleration, rending gaps.

Every historical era is multi temporal.

Simultaneously drawing from the obsolete, the contemporary and the futuristic.

An object a circumstance is thus poly chronic multi temporal and reveals a um and reveals a time that is gathered together with multiple pleats.

And I think quite a lot of people, um, often drawing on different sources have, have,

have tried to articulate different versions of temporality itself as something that, that we need to think of in this varied non uniform way.

Um, a particularly um, and this, this is quite abstract, I would admit, but I think that the um, that, that this description,

especially any object or circumstance as polyclinic or multi temporal,

is really useful for us as literary scholars trying to conceive of the relationship between literature and history.

We can't see a text as a product, as however complicated a fashion of a given historical moment.

If we see any given historical moment at any points in history as itself,

alive in time and existing between many times as non synchronous with itself necessarily occupying a vexed position in relation to,

uh, the very idea of a given moment in time.

Now the interview with Safran, which I just quoted, was conducted by Bruno the tour,

who went on to become an even more influential philosopher of science and society in his own right,

and in whose and whose works have become increasingly influential in literary studies in recent years.

And in his most influential book, The one I'd probably suggest you start with if you want to read some Latour.

We have never been modern. It's also nice and short. It also helps, um.

He argues that this idea of distinct historical eras is itself a kind of fantasy of modernity.

It's a story that we tell ourselves, an ideology that allows modern subjects and societies falsely,

to argue that they have overcome and quarantine themselves from the enemies of history,

from the others of the historical past, or the others of the geographical present.

Um, this is what he calls the very modern impression that we are living in a new time that breaks with the past.

By contrast, he argues, modern temporality is the result of a retraining imposed on entities which would

pertain to all sorts of times and pertain to all sorts of ontological statuses.

Modernising progress is thinkable only on condition that all the elements that are contemporary according to the calendar belong to the same time.

Then and only then, time forms a continuous and progressive flow.

The beautiful order.

Is disturbed once the quasi objects are seen as mixing up different periods, ontologies and genres, then a historical period will have the appearance.

They will get the impression of a great hotchpotch. Now, it might seem very counterintuitive to question the idea that all the elements

that are contemporary according to the calendar belong to the same time.

But I think what little is arguing here is that this idea of temporal coincidence is far less neutral than it seems.

This is one of the ways that complex and multifaceted objects become stabilised.

By reducing them to the historical moments of which they are an expression.

And so, just to give you an example of this, is very different in many ways from Latour.

They're not mutually influencing one another,

but there's some of the most interesting theorising of time in contemporary literary theory has been undertaken by queer

theorists who have questioned not only the often heteronormative histories into which texts are placed about the,

but the supposed neutrality of the very ambition to locate things within time.

So this isn't on the handout, but I'd recommend the work of of Elizabeth Freeman, who has coined the intriguing term Chrono normativity.

Uh, on which, um, on which places to place someone within time to place a person or an object or a text within time to demand that

it obeys certain temporal rules and fits itself within certain narratives and forms of temporal developments,

understanding, and so on, that that's actually not a neutral act. It's a kind of disciplining act.

It's a it's a way that certain normative, um, conceptions of acceptable being get imposed upon people.

Um, and what about the middle age? As Carolyn Din Shaw has argued,

for forms of deliberate anachronism and disjunctive queer temporality that will

rupture and resist this imposition of neatly delineated and linear temporal scheme.

She has a book called A Couple of Books, but especially the one called How Soon Is Now?

Which is a Smith's title. As some of you all know, that's a really excellent book which thinks about that.

Now put it the most influential, um, person writing about literature in the aftermath of Bruno.

So Rita Flukey and her book The Limits of Critique, where she argues that we should see texts not only as products of their time,

but as acting across and seeking to shape subsequent time.

And it's for this reason, as she puts it,

that the busy aftermath of the busy afterlife of the literary artefact refutes our efforts to box it into a moment of origin,

to lock it up in a temporal container.

And in a sense, she's beginning with the wonderfully obvious, straightforward point that no one, in a sense, writes for their historical moment.

Even if writers are formed by the historical events of their worst creation, they also write with the knowledge, whether a cause for hope or fear,

as with our opening thought experiment, that the work might survive and be read by people even long after their own death.

And so I want to end this lecture by just turning as an example of where to take some of this admittedly quite abstract thinking and,

um, and just talk to you about this John Donne poem, The Relic. Um, I'm not going be able to read you the whole thing.

Uh, but I will read you the first two stanzas.

Or maybe just the first stanza. When my grave is broke up again, some second guessed to entertain.

For graves have learned that woman had to be to more than one a bed and heat.

It thinks it spies a brace, a bracelet of bright hair about the bone.

Well, not he letters alone and think that they're a loving couple lies.

Who thought that this device might be some that some way to make their souls at the last busy day.

Meet at this grave and make a little stay. If this fall in a time or land where Mr. Ocean doth command.

Then he that takes us up will bring us to the bishops or the King to make us relics.

Then thou shall be as Mary Magdalene, and I as something else there by the dance.

An interesting figure to introduce into these debates, because, um,

many of the sort of 20th century debates about reading to which I've alluded revolved around done.

So he was the most associated. He was beloved by the New Critics.

He was the most associated with the idea that, um, great poems were finally raw,

self-contained artefacts that were the irreducible expression of their own meaning,

transcending the circumstances of their, of that of their, uh, composition.

Conversely, he's also been, um, read uh, in granular connection with his, um, with the historically contingent circumstances in which he lived.

So Donne's very much an author who has seemed at different times to demand to be read in and out of context.

Now, what makes Donne, I think for me, a really intriguing kind of test case for these contrasting approaches,

the timeless or the intensely time bound is that with the Relic,

as with so many of his writings, he's creating a text that is itself temporally unmoored and on mooring, but not outside of time.

He oscillates in the poem between alternative temporalities without belonging or wanting his reader to belong to any one of them.

So the strikingly blunt and metrically jarring opening line When my grave is broke up again, which is kind of an amazing way to begin a poem,

taking the lyric speaker's death entirely for granted, not lamenting it, not even dwelling on it, but leaping straight to the future.

Um, time of dis interment. And this is partly, I think, because of, um, the curious way in which English verb tenses mark time,

because as an uninflected language, we don't have a straightforward grammatical future tense.

He uses the present to refer to an imagined future. Time, as we often do, is broke up effectively.

Means will be will be broken up, or rather, it leaves the reader swaying between alternate time frames,

an effect magnified by that final word again, which collapse and which suggests and collapses into one another.

Two imagined futures, one in which the grave, his dog, and the other in which it is written.

As the poem then develops, it starts to revolve around these temporal dislocations continue,

but they revolve around the titular idea of the relic itself.

How are we to understand what this word meant to Don and what it meant to his original readers?

Again, you could take a more straightforwardly historical or historicist or historicist approach.

You might research what saint's relics were and what the attitudes to them were.

In Donne's lifetime, you might discover that they had been abolished at the Reformation, with many previous relics destroyed and ridiculed.

And if you delved a bit further in your reading, you might discover that Donne, who was a convert from Roman Catholic from Roman Catholicism,

had two Jesuit uncles whose prized possession was a tooth relic of their distant relative, Sir Thomas More,

and that the truth supposedly split itself spontaneously into two when they were forced to go their separate ways.

So I can you can absolutely do this. You could research relics.

You could build up a really rich biographical, wider, contextual or wider historical accounts of their contexts,

one and one very valid and interesting way of historicity.

I can only imagine an essay that you could write around, uh, around those ideas.

But while thinking of this thought is necessary and really worth undertaking, I also don't think it's sufficient for understanding Donne's poem.

The whole point of relics is that they are ordinary, often quite mundane, often quite disgusting,

earthy objects that simultaneously continue to participate in the divine and the timeless.

Relics themselves are at once in and out of time, caught up in the vicissitudes of human history even as they transcend it.

So when Donne chooses to call his poem The Relic, he was imagining himself and his lover on the model of this category of objects violently,

violently contested and also temporally unstable.

He places this complex category of objects into this imagined scenario,

in which he imagines their survival through time as a fantasy for the endurance of human love,

but one that's achieved only at the cost of being misunderstood, mis categorised.

When one re-emerges in this imagined future.

Land of. Of mist, of mist, of ocean.

So what I'm arguing then, is that the relic itself as a poem, is an extreme example of this, but one that I think points towards other ways.

You might think of poems and other texts in these terms. The this poem is itself.

Sort of deliberately and tactically poly chronic multi temporal to return to those at that time for me shall say,

both the objects on which it focuses and the processes that it describes and the words that it's actually using and doing,

all of those things are themselves are themselves calculatedly, multi temporal.

We are made to feel, as we read this poem and part of its power,

I think its interest and its power lies in its making us feel that we are being asked to exist in or,

or, um, mediate between or operate within multiple times or time frames at once.

And so while the while, while the putting into context, the putting into history is certainly one way to make sense of it,

to really think of or, uh, explore or make sense of the relationship between between literature and history.

Within this poem, you would have to think not just about the context that surround it,

but of the poem as a poly chronic multi temporal agent actor in and of itself.

Thank you. We do have a couple of minutes for questions if anyone would like to ask any.

If anything was unclear or anything, I mentioned that you didn't write down in time.

Uh, there is on the handout on, um, canvas, uh,

list of texts that I mentioned should most CB that includes Elizabeth Freeman and Carolyn didn't show a couple of others.

Any deep needs for clarification? Yeah.

Um, did you run this discussion kind of in the, uh, like the semantic and syntactic developments of language throughout time,

as well as in, like, terms of changing phrases and such?

Yeah, yeah, yeah. Sorry. Everybody did.

Well, yeah. And that's a really interesting point.

And I guess I kind of alluded to this by starting with the changing meanings of the word context itself.

But that's that, that's definitely, um, one of the, one of the good uses you can make of the OED, which is not exhaustive.

It doesn't tell you every use of a word, of course, but it often gives you kind of clues, as if you see a word changing over time.

If you know that a words meaning shifts, it then becomes, okay, we've got this spectrum from meaning A to meaning B.

Does the use of it in this particular poem feel like it's telling me something about that transition?

Does it sort of have both senses of the word, um involved within it?

So I think if you can, I guess you could argue that a word that changes its meaning in a particularly

remarkable way is likely to be particularly sort of poly sort of poly chronic.

It's like almost like both senses of the word exist within it, like it not in every instance, but in certain charged transitional environments.

If a word, if a word, it's seeming to change its meaning.

That feels like a particularly good, good way to link it to these larger arcs of historical time.

Yeah. Thanks. Okay.

Thanks very much. Have a good rest of term.

