[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
Uh. Good afternoon. Good afternoon everyone.

Good afternoon. Good afternoon. Good afternoon. Uh, does everyone have a handout

who would like a handout? Great.

They're also available on Canvas should you want an electronic version of the handout, either now or later.

Great. Let's start. Um. Shall I kill myself, or shall I, uh, carry on living?

Um, not my thoughts in the end of a day when I'll be giving three lectures in five hours.

But Hamlet's, uh, in what's probably the most theatrical soliloquy, famous one, ever written.

Uh, or in his words. To be or not to be.

That is the question. Whether it is nobler in the mind to suffer the slings and arrows of outrageous fortune.

Or to take arms against the Sea of Troubles. And by opposing end them?

It's hard to imagine a definition of literature that wouldn't find room for

To be or not to be. But why?

What is there in this soliloquy or our reactions to it that makes us think of it as literature

rather than just the theatrical equivalent of a teenager locking himself in his bedroom and howling, God, I wish I was dead.

If we wanted to draw up a list of reasons

we could start with the form of the speech. Lines of iambic pentameter that repeatedly topple over by an extra syllable.

To be or not to be. That is the question,

and so on. And then start again. Like someone peering over the edge of a building before drawing back.

Or we could show how the speech fits into much larger linguistic patterns in a play that is full of questions.

Question it, Horatio. The question of these wars. You question with a wicked tongue and many, many more, especially when it comes to death.

Thou comest in such a questionable shape that I will speak to thee

I'll call the Hamlet, he says to his father's ghost earlier in the play.

And again you might notice how his voice goes beyond its natural measure, as he realises this is also what the ghost has done.

Or, more than 400 years after it was first spoken,

we could simply draw attention to the speeches cultural longevity, the fact that,

as the philosopher Martin Heidegger once argued, a work of literature, he says, is never used up.

It is forever being reworked in the light of contemporary concerns.

That's why we find echoes of the speech in later poems like The Love Song of J.

Alfred Prufrock. No, I'm not Prince Hamlet, nor was meant to be, Prufrock says, a line that's cut off before it can finish.

To be or not to be. And so reminds us that an allusion both is and is not its original.

A bit like a ghost. An allusion involves both sameness and difference.

To be and not to be.

And of course, allusion isn't restricted to poetry.

And here you might think about the way that to be or not to be has also made its way into films.

Um, cartoons. Uh.

Songs. Now even, bizarrely, hats promoting bacon, um,

all of which show that Hamlet's dreams of escape in his speech have in some ways been realised by his speech.

And of course, we could come up with other reasons for thinking of to be or not to be as literature,

but putting it in this way and not saying I really hate my life and want to die.

Hamlet makes his situation sound impersonal, a general problem rather than a private dilemma.

Not once in the whole soliloquy does he ever say I

or we. But always we and our.

And that might suggest another model of literature: writing by individuals

that is about a much larger group of people. Writing that captures feeling that we recognise as our own,

even if we could not have expressed them on our own.

Even the weighing up of alternatives to be or not to be could be viewed as a little model of tolerance and balance.

The sort of ethical values that are supposed to be concentrated in literature rather more than they are in everyday life.

Then I suppose there's the fact that Sea of Troubles was already a stock phrase in Shakespeare's time,

but its ambiguity here lets hamlet take a cliché and rinse it clean.

And that's another model of literature. Writing

that allows even a speech about killing yourself to use words in a way that gives them new life.

Now, these are all good reasons for thinking of to be or not to be as a piece of literature.

I've been suggesting we can think of it as that because of their aesthetic form and patterning,

because of cultural longevity, uh, the expression of ethical values.

And an ability to, in Ezra Pound's famous phrase, make it new.

But of course, none of these reasons will be enough on their own to define Hamlet's speech as literature,

because many other kinds of writing use similar tools or produce similar effects.

So the speech has a tightly organised form, but then so do advertising slogans, uh, nursery rhymes, riddles, um, even tweets, uh,

like this, this acrostic, uh, by the former Manchester United footballer Ryan Giggs, written for his then girlfriend Kate Greville.

Uh, which, with its doubling up, old L is for legs.

L is for legs. That could indicate a kind of syntactic rapture.

Um, or, um, just an awkward confusion of women with pieces of furniture.

To be or not to be is part of a pattern.

But then, uh, so are many people's Instagram posts.

Um, and in any case, recognising a pattern would tell us nothing about the quality of the writing supporting it.

After all, there is a lot of blood in Hamlet.

By my count, there are over two dozen mentions of the word and its close relations.

There's a lot more blood in Dracula, though, with over 100 mentions.

Blood pumps through Bram Stoker's narrative like a sort of literary circulatory system, or seeps into it like a stain.

But I think few critics would claim that this makes Dracula four times better than Hamlet.

If pushed, most would probably agree with George Orwell,

who put it alongside other popular thrillers and romances and detective stories in a category that he called good bad literature.

Um, what about longevity? Well, Hamlet has certainly proven itself to have cultural staying power.

But then so have many proverbs and bits of magical thinking,

like saying bless you after someone sneezes long after we stop worrying that their soul might have fallen out of their nose.

Um, what about literature's ethical dimension? Um, well, this is a more complicated issue, and it's had a long critical pedigree.

Um, from Percy Shelley to Iris Murdoch, writers have often argued that morality is closely connected to the imagination.

Because this is what we use to feel our way into the lives of other people.

According to this model, reading literature lets us retreat from social life in order to rehearse a finer engagement with it.

So getting inside the head of a character like Dorothea in Middlemarch might encourages us to rethink how we understand real people.

And for some contemporary critics, most famously Martha Nussbaum,

this can involve the form of a literary work as well as its contents.

I should say, by the way, when I'm mentioning, I'm dropping a number of names into this discussion,

you'll find references to all of these people in their works at the end of the handout. Um, so we read a paperback thriller primarily for its plot.

The novel is exhausted by its conclusion. Because what mostly interests us is whodunnit.

Not how the writer done it. To read a novel like Middlemarch, on the other hand,

is to become aware that it's not just the plot that reveals what happens when freedom is placed within constraints.

The same is true of every vividly realised narrative detail.

In other words, Dorothea's struggle to reconcile her needs with those of other people is reflected in the

way the novel too tries to find a place for each of its parts within a larger whole.

That is, the novel

Middlemarch does not only depict society, it encourages us to recreate it in a more nuanced and finely felt form inside our own heads.

So that's the theory of that form of moral reading. Anyway.

But of course, aesthetically good books don't always produce morally good leaders.

As I pointed out in a lecture yesterday that some of you were at, Joseph Stalin was a voracious reader who claimed to get through 500 pages a day,

annotating them with comments like waffle and gibberish and rubbish and scumbag and haha.

Yet I think few people would claim that Stalin's bookishness made him a more kindly, more thoughtful individual.

Uh,

one historian who studied his reading habits concludes that although books undoubtedly did provide Stalin with solace and intellectual nourishment,

here was a reader who plainly failed to see that it wasn't only

when opening a work of fiction, he held other people's lives in his hands.

And finally, what about the idea that literature is a way of refreshing old forms of speech which have become stale and exhausted with age?

Um. It's true that this is something that many writers do set out to do.

In his book Beckett's Dying Words, uh, the critic Christopher Ricks points out that Beckett often takes phrases that seem to be exhausted,

stale, and then gives them a transfusion of new life.

Uh, for instance, um, that's not said anymore

it must have ceased to be of interest from How It Is.

Meaning it must have ceased to be of interest.

Or it must have ceased. To be of interest.

There's a similar joke in the title of Beckett's original French version, which was comment

c'est, which means how it is, but also comes close to being a pun on commencer, meaning to begin.

But of course, making it new is also a key part of newspaper headlines and football chants,

both of which specialise in taking cultural commonplaces and giving them an unexpected twist.

And I think even the most hardened postmodernist would be find it tricky to champion The Sun's headline writer as a literary giants.

For coming up, when Caledonian Thistle beat Celtic, with a headline Super Caley go ballistic Celtic are atrocious.

Um uh, let alone the Fulham fans who used to affectionately mock the goal-shy striker

Bobby Zamora by singing when you're sat in row Z and the ball hits your head,

that's Zamora. So bearing all these kind of problems, these questions, these caveats in mind.

What is literature? Well, the usual place to start when looking for a definition is a dictionary.

But even the OED raises more questions than it answers by offering many pages of meanings that include the realm of letters or books, printed

matter of any kind, and the result or products of literary activity.

As well as written work valued for superior or lasting artistic merit.

Um, it's like being presented with the fragments of a giant jigsaw puzzle without a picture on the box to work from.

So that's the problem. One possible solution

is given by Terry Eagleton. In his book The Events of Literature.

According to Eagleton, when we ask ourselves what literature is, we're likely to come up with empirical rather than theoretical categories.

That is, we might say that, uh, it is work that is, um, fictional.

Or and delivers insight into human experience, and or uses language in a peculiarly heightened way.

And or is not as purely practical as, say, a shopping list.

And or has a high cultural value. Because no one of these categories would be a sufficient condition to declare a particular work as literature.

Eagleton says that what we're left with is not a fixed set of criteria, but a looser set of family resemblances.

This is a model that he borrows from Wittgenstein.

So, um, I might have very little in common with my sisters

beyond the slightly unfortunate shape of nose that we all have.

Uh, I might have much more in common with a far flung but sympathetic cousin.

Even though facially we are very different. And these relationships can change over time. As my sisters produce children with the same unfortunate nose.

Uh, or my cousin reveals that he thought Brexit was a really spiffy idea.

Um, and according to Eagleton, literature develops in a similar way.

It, too, can be thought of as a set of relationships rather than a set of fixed objects,

family resemblances that are always open to expansion and transformation.

Now, this makes literature hard to define because to define something is to fix its limits.

Whereas according to this model, literature is a category that is inherently fuzzy and changeable.

But just because something is hard to define doesn't mean that definitions themselves are useless.

In his book Philosophical Investigations, Wittgenstein

the philosopher points out that a field doesn't stop being a field just because it doesn't have clear boundaries.

Just as an indistinct photograph of someone is still a photograph of them, and is not a raccoon or a ham sandwich.

I should stress that these are my comparisons and not Wittgenstein's.

It's certainly hard to imagine a single definition of literature that could include everything that you find in Terry Eagleton's index.

There goes Jane Austen, Bambi, Agatha Christie, and so on.

But it could be a bit easier if we think of literature as a set of family resemblances where some connections are strong,

others are looser, and others are practically non-existent.

Much the same is true of critical approaches to literature.

If you were to read everything on the faculty reading lists for this paper,

you might wonder how so many experts could spend so long debating the question,

what is literature and fail to come up with a single conclusive answer between them.

But another way of thinking about it might be the answer is indeed what exists between them,

where between could involve significant gaps and slippages, as well as large areas of agreement.

Criticism, too, you might think of as a set of family resemblances.

There are intellectual overlaps, like the critical equivalent of a family nose,

and there are also plenty of stand offs and squabbles.

What I'm going to be doing in the rest of this lecture is mapping out some of these resemblances.

That is, some of the ways that you might approach the question of what literature is and how it works and maybe even why it matters

based on what a number of earlier critics and theorists have made of that question.

Most of the time I'm going to behave a bit like a boxing referee by showing you what the main questions are

without getting too personally involved.

My advice to you, though, at this point, would be to do something rather different. As this is an argument that is still not settled

and as the argument now includes you, the most useful notes might be not just a summary of what I'm going to say,

but also a set of reflections on everything which I'm going to be glossing over or ignoring.

What happens when you apply the tools of literary criticism to literary criticism?

Well, one good place to start might be with the history of the word literature itself.

According to the critic Raymond Williams, this is, he says, a difficult word.

And in his book Key Words, he maps out the main changes that it's undergone over the years.

So coming from the Latin words litera, a letter of the alphabet, in the 14th century, it meant polite learning.

So a man of letters was someone who had acquired literacy.

By the Renaissance, literature had started to take on the sense of a shared body of knowledge.

So, uh, to be learned in all literature and erudition, divine and humane,

as Francis Bacon put it in one of his essays,

was have acquired knowledge of the books one should have read in order to be thought of as well read.

The next major shifts came with the Romantics,

who narrowed down the category of literature to mean creative writing, especially poetry as opposed to factual knowledge.

So by the mid-19th century, then, the meaning of literature had shifted from the dissemination of information

to the exercise of the imagination. From the world as it was

to the secondary worlds that writers dreamt up on the page.

Now this is a story that's often been told.

In fact, one might point to the sheer number of times it's been told as evidence

that literary historians can share some of the same interests as creative writers.

They too enjoy sifting through events in the search for plots.

They, too, enjoy combing through anonymous crowds of speakers and coming up with heroes.

For instance, when Jonathan Bates tells this story in his book English Literature A Very Short Introduction,

he singled out Thomas De Quincey as what he calls the inventor of literature with a capital L.

Pointing out that, in one of his essays, De Quincey

distinguishes between the literature of knowledge, by which he means newspapers or parliamentary reports, and the literature of power,

by which he means poems like Paradise Lost.

But for some people, though, that kind of story has an ending.

Whereas for De Quincey's successors, from Matthew Arnold's to F. R. Leavis,

literature was a special category of writing, one that had special properties of form or moral uplift.

A number of more recent critics have argued that literature has now returned to its historical roots to mean any kind of writing.

Now that older sense never entirely went away.

De Quincy's contemporary

William Hazlitt recalled a colleague who thought that the physicist Isaac Newton and the philosopher John Locke were,

he said, the two greatest names in English literature.

Even today, if your bank offered you some literature to take away,

you'd probably expect to be given some financial leaflets rather than a copy of Middlemarch.

What has changed, though, in the past few decades,

is the conviction among some critics that the category of literature should be broadened, should be democratised

if it's going to escape the idea that some writing is not just different, but is better.

For these critics, literature as a term is not just descriptive,

it is evaluative. It's therefore inescapably bound up with other assumptions of hierarchy and privilege and power.

The inclusion of some writers in this category necessarily means the exclusion of others.

Selection involves rejection.

The alternative to this is to choose everything as literature and therefore to not really choose at all.

So, for instance, in 2009, a book called A New Literary History of America was published, which,

alongside essays on Mark Twain and Robert Frost and other canonical authors, included entries on the painter Jackson Pollock,

the singer Chuck Berry, the porn star Linda Lovelace and the Winchester rifle.

On the grounds that, in the editors' words, literary means not only what is written,

but what is voiced, what is expressed, what is invented in whatever form.

And in that rapid post-modern turn from the form of a poem to the form of a rifle, literature becomes a rather loose synonym for culture.

Polymorphous, promiscuous,

it includes everyone and everything.

Now that's a fairly extreme example, but it does draw attention to a common

idea in some recent criticism, which is that literature should be thought of as a set of writings with particular properties.

But rather a category that reflects a certain set of cultural values.

If the works that we single out display complexity or beauty or formal polish,

maybe that's because these are the sorts of features we expect from art.

Rather than, say, works that excite us sexually or include pictures of kittens.

Or put another way,

according to these critics, the category of literature is what allows those who hold cultural power to institutionalise it and perpetuate it.

What is literature? According to Roland Barthes in a comment he made in 1969,

literature is what gets taught.

Now much of this discussion centres on the canon.

The canon is a word that used to refer to theological texts that had been accepted into a body of Orthodox scripture, like the Gospels.

It now, though, refers to writing that's been elevated to classic status.

Great books. Um, in the 1980s, the so-called canon wars were fought across American college campuses,

focusing especially on what should appear on a course syllabus.

If literature reflects the human condition, the argument went,

should it not reflect the experience of its students?

At the time, most college survey courses of great books centred on material that was written by dead white European males.

But most college students weren't European or male.

Many weren't white and none at all were dead. So, the argument went,

if literature was a form of linguistic representation, should it not also pay heed to social representation?

Should the canon not in fact be representative of the full diversity of the United States?

And these debates do still rumble on in various ways.

As recently as March 2014, Harper's Magazine published an article entitled What is Literature?

The subtitle of which was In Defence of the canon.

Um. Radical solutions to this question had included opening up literature survey courses to anyone or anything.

Hence that textbook I mentioned earlier that he puts porn stars and rifles alongside Henry James.

Um, more modest solutions have included keeping what exists but building new extensions on top.

Hence books like, um, Frank Kermode's History and Value,

in which he argues the canon is really a form of cultural memory and it's therefore perfectly capable of stretching

elastically to accommodate new works without anyone needing to do anything as violent as demolish it or explode it.

But of course, these questions aren't limited to cultural theorists.

Um. In fact, they confront you every time you step into a bookshop.

Are the titles in a series like Penguin Classics or Oxford World's Classics, are they chosen because they are historically and aesthetically important?

Or just because they are commercially viable? And what would you need to do to one of these books to dilute it or destroy its cultural value?

A story like Alice's Adventures in Wonderland has many of the features I discussed earlier as the classic signatures of a literary text,

such as an innovative form. It's an example of somebody literally trying to write like a dream.

Uh, longevity. It's never been out of print.

Uh, and flexibility. Uh, it's been reworked as

a statue in Central Park

and in Disneyland. Uh, in some rather creepy tattoos.

Um. And in a creepier Tokyo restaurant

that used to serve caterpillar sushi rolls and mock turtle salads.

But what about a recent version that translates the whole book into emojis?

Alice grows and changes in the story but remains recognisably the same.

Is the same true of her story, once it's been translated into emojis?

You're all fluent in emoji, I know, so you'll be much better than me at translating this.

I think this is 'and what is the use of a book, thought Alice, without pictures or conversations'.

And what about Oxford? There's no syllabus in the English faculty, no set text, except maybe one or two in Old English.

But how should they be read? As examples in the sense of representative parts that have been cut off from a greater whole?

Or examples in the sense of literary models that somehow outstrip lesser works.

Uh, one of the changes that's occurred in Oxford in the last few years has been to open up the course from English literature,

which is what it used to be called to literature in English.

The body of material that now includes writers from America, Africa, Australia and elsewhere.

Branching out from the well-trodden path that used to take students from Beowulf to Virginia Woolf, but not much further.

So. What then, what should we do with a writer like Rudyard Kipling?

He was the first winner of the Nobel Prize for literature.

Uh, he's a crucial pivot between the Victorian age and modernism.

His writing is full of uncanny encounters between the familiar and the foreign, at the level of language as well as people.

He was also an unapologetic imperialist who composed the energy that was read out during the funeral of his friend Cecil Rhodes in Zimbabwe,

formally known as Rhodesia, in 1902, which includes lines like it is his will that he look forth across the world, he won, and so on.

As you might have heard, there's been a lot of discussion in Oxford over the last few years about whether

monuments to people like Rhodes should be removed in places like Oxford

or contextualised or simply ignored.

But of course, poems have also been thought of as monuments.

From Shakespeare's Sonnets to Shelley's Ozymandias.

They are celebrated as works that still survive when every statue is crumbled into dust.

So then what should we do about Kipling's poem? Accept it as evidence that, as Walter Benjamin once famously argued,

there is no document of civilisation which is not at the same time a document of barbarism?

Or cut it from the canon? If Rhodes should fall, as one group of students argued a few years ago,

should Kipling fall as well? The critic Christopher Ricks's solution to this sort of question is to point out that

writers themselves often decide which of their predecessors are worth persisting with.

Um. As he argues in his Essay on Criticism at the present time, it's by taking on an earlier writer, either admiringly or more combatively

taking them on, that a later writer will keep them alive on the page.

In the case of a poet like T.S. Eliot, it can even give them a second life.

Uh, you might think next term as you get to grips with a writer like Eliot

it's no coincidence many of his allusions to writers like Webster and Dunne in The Wasteland come in lines about resurrection.

Corpses that have begun to sprout and so on.

And that suggests another reason why literature might be such a slippery word to define.

Every new literary work expands the possibilities of what it might mean.

Let me show you what I mean. Take the case of William Carlos Williams's famous little poem

This is Just to Say. I've eaten the plums that were in the icebox and which you were probably saving for breakfast.

Forgive me they were delicious so sweet and so cold.

Now at first glance this looks a bit like one of those documents you might find on a website where people can post images of abandoned love letters,

or anything else that's become unmoored from its original context.

Um, so here is a few examples here from found magazine.com.

A smiley face warning If I catch you my house, I will beat you to death.

Have a nice day. Um, there's this post-it note

Not good to leave this kind of thing lying around on the printer.

Um, there's this apology which ends with a plea, PS are we still on for prom?

And the sketch that's been crossed out, um, and then replaced along with the reply.

What the hell do you think, asswhole? Which is

I love that. A bit of an ass? No, an ass whole.

Whole. These are

These are the seeds of possible narratives, lost narratives.

They tell us everything. They tell us nothing. Um, and we could read This is Just to Say

in a similar way, as a reminder of how much can fall between the cracks of a poem.

Of how much can be hiding in the blank space that surrounds it.

But there is another way of reading it, and that's as a reminder of how much gets ignored when we try to define literature.

For instance, does literature use language in a special way?

Well, that's certainly one popular view. According to these critics, what distinguishes literary texts from notes like if I catch you in my house,

I will beat you to death, is that they distract words from their usual burden of representation.

What I mean by that is that, um, usually language has a referential or a pragmatic function.

So if you're sitting in my office and I say, oh, the window's open.

You might, um, understand me to be apologising for making you chilly.

Or maybe inviting you to get up to close it. If, on the other hand, I say, ah, a casement open at night to let the warm love in.

You might report me for sexual harassment. Um. Or hopefully you might recognise I'm beginning our tutorial

by quoting two lines from Keats's Ode to Psyche, which is a poem that has nothing to do with real windows.

But everything to do with the idea of a poem itself as a kind of metaphorical window.

A little space on the page that opens up onto much larger ones in the reader's imagination.

Now, the obvious difference, of course, is that although I can close my real window, Keats's poetic window will always remain open.

Similarly, if you eat a plum, it's gone for good.

If you write a poem about plums, on the other hand, it produces aural pleasures that can be endlessly repeated.

And that makes This is Just to Say something like a poem about the creation of poetry.

But you notice it also resists being read as a poem at all.

Repeatedly it teases us with hints of an underlying pattern before moving off in a different direction.

We have stanzas that comprise 12 syllables and then another 12 syllables, ah, 13 syllables.

There are internal echoes that never quite settle into a full rhyme, like for breakfast, forgive. Grammatical structures that are carefully set up,

equally carefully smashed up. Like that were and then

which you were. It's as if Williams wanted to flirt with literary structures but never fully commit to them.

And what we're left with is the spectacle of the poem struggling with its shadowy twin.

A kind of non-poem or anti-poem.

But of course, that's only one way of looking at it. The alternative

is that we read This is Just to Say as a poem, not because of any intrinsic features of language or form,

but simply because of the conventions of interpretation that we bring to it when we read it.

This is the argument of literary theorist Stanley Fish in a famous essay called How to Recognise a Poem When You See One,

which records his experiments with some American college students back in 1971.

And what he did is this. Entering his classroom for a discussion about religious poetry, he noticed that

he had left a list of names on the blackboard from an earlier class that was about linguistics.

So. Jacobs-Rosenbaum, Levin, Thorne, Hayes,

Ohman. Instead of rubbing the list out, he drew a box around it and then asked his students to interpret it. Wanting to please him,

they dutifully trotted out a set of increasingly outlandish readings.

They told him it was a religious poem written in the shape of a cross or an altar.

Uh, they said it was about the links between Jacob's ladder and Jesus's crown of thorns.

Levin was a veiled reference to the unleavened bread carried by the children of Israel on their exodus from Egypt.

Um, they pointed out that the most prominent letters were S and O and N or

ah: son. And so on. I won't go on.

They did though, at great length, using a mixture of information and ingenuity to create a poem when none had previously existed.

But the conclusion that Fish arrived at was that literature was not a body of writing, but a set of social agreements or frameworks for interpretation.

A literary text could be distinguished from a bus ticket or a recipe,

he argued, not because it was more linguistically complex or revealed something important about the human condition,

but simply because of the judgement of a particular interpretive community.

That's the phrase he comes back to again and again. Interpretive community.

So by this reckoning, uh, we are primed to read

This is Just to Say as a poem because we are already used to reading other poems that seem to be about eating fruit and feeling guilty,

but then turn out to be about much else besides. An obvious example here would be Milton's Paradise Lost.

The fact that Williams's poem seems so ordinary, so offhand, compared to the epic sweep of Milton's verse,

might then make us think again about what we want from poetry.

And whether such a small poem seems somehow wanting.

And that would then place This is Just to Say in a category

that you can trace back to readymade artworks like Duchamp's Urinal and forward to more recent pieces like Jeff Koons' vacuum cleaners.

These are works that ask us to think about the ordinary shapes of modern life and the cultural values that we invest in them.

On your handout, I've given you another kind of readymade.

It's a poem pieced together from some of Donald Trump's old tweets and speeches.

And it works rather like, it's like a modern variation on mock heroic

verse. It ridicules the speaker's pretensions by seeming to take them so seriously,

by taking ephemeral soundbites and giving them the dignity and the permanence of print.

Anyway, you can read that on your own time. But going back to This is Just to Say, on a very simple level,

then, a poem like this one takes words we normally take for granted, and it strips them of their familiarity until they seem new and strange.

And this is an argument about literature that's usually associated with a group of critics known as the Russian Formalists.

Especially Viktor Shklovsky's famous in 1917 essay Art as Technique.

And of course, it has a number of limitations.

Anything can seem strange if you concentrate on it for long enough.

And someone who is really determined could make even perfectly ordinary linguistic situations take on unexpectedly rich layers of implication.

Let's take just one example. Imagine what Hamlet would make of the exit signs in a theatre.

In fact, and one reason that you might find literary texts valuable is they give us the license to pause over language, to dwell on the materials

we usually have to turn into something else.

Let me try and summarise what I've been saying so far before trying to round out and show what you can do with it.

I've been suggesting that literature is what the critic William Empson would call a complex word.

And its shifting boundaries probably tell us as much about ourselves as they do about writing.

Or put another way, what literature means

involves us trying to puzzle out what we mean by literature.

What we need the concept for and what we hope to get from it.

And in sketching out some of those debates, I've tried to be as neutral and even-handed as I can,

but as one of the things that this degree expects you to do is to make up your own minds about what literature is and how it works,

I think it's only fair that in the last few minutes I lay my own cards on the

table and then leave it to you to decide whether or not it's a winning hands.

Going back to what I said at the start of the lecture, this is one place where your notes might well include

Well, yes, but or well, hang on, what about.

The only caveat is that some of what I'm about to say draws on Seamus Heaney's excellent essay, The Redress of Poetry.

So if you don't like my version, you might want to read him, because he says it all much better than I can.

Um, I think there are two main ways of thinking about literature, which are as different but intrinsically related as a pair of twins.

These are literature as a form of work and literature as a form of play.

Uh, let me take them in that order. Okay. We often talk about works of literature.

What about the work of literature?

What does it do? Earlier, I pointed out that literature tends to release language from its pragmatic or referential functions.

But there is another possibility. Literature can have an instrumental function. Like a speech act,

it can do something in the act of saying it.

Now this doesn't work immediately or directly as like some other speech acts do.

Like I now pronounce you as a husband and wife or, um, I name this ship Boaty McBoatface.

Um, but it can produce a more delayed or diffused response.

And there are some famous examples, like the influence of a bestseller like Uncle Tom's Cabin on the abolition of slavery

or the copycat suicides that followed the publication of Goethe's novel, The Sorrows of Young Werther at the end of the 18th century.

There are also some literary theorists like Jean-Paul Sartre and Pierre Macherey, and others with a Marxist slant to their thinking

who would argue that literature reveals the ideological structures that are usually floating around unnoticed in everyday speech.

And the work of literature is to prepare the ground for revolutionary actions rather than words.

Of course, the same kind of argument may be made by critics of other political persuasions.

It might be that the work literature does, and here there are more echoes of the Russian formalists and their followers,

the work that it does is to make us look again at everything we thought we already knew.

But literature can be more self-delighting than this, less serious.

The playwright Tom Stoppard once said that art celebrates a world which includes itself.

Art celebrates a world which includes itself. And that suggests a second model of literature, which is language going on holiday.

Whether or not works like Finnegans Wake or Edward Lear's Nonsense Poems do try and disenchant reality,

as a political critic might want them to, they do re-enchant the medium of writing itself. And looked at in that way,

literature is like a language game. It's a response to the world, but an irresponsible one.

It is a form of play. And the most celebrated works do both at once.

They work and they play. Take the case of what's probably the most famous poem in the English language.

I wandered lonely as a cloud that floats on high o'er vales and hills,

When all at once I saw a crowd a host of dancing daffodils.

Along the lake, beneath the trees. 10,000 dancing in the breeze and some.

It's often reprinted in anthologies,

which is appropriate in a way, because the word anthology comes from the Greek word anthos, which means flower.

So an anthology is literally a collection of flowers. But as originally published,

it was part of Wordsworth's long term plan to awaken a more imaginative response to homely or

neglected bits of the world by showing how they had been filtered through his own imagination.

And that's why this poem gives us not a finished set of thoughts, but a display of somebody thinking.

The present tense of dancing daffodils, and in the final line dances with the daffodils

show that something that happened in the past is still happening

in Wordsworth's memory and on the page.

The line breaks work like little double takes.

Asking him to find exactly the right word for what he saw. A crowd? Oh no, a host, a host.

Even the punctuation stages his sense of time passing, like that colon at the

end of the second stanza that works like a little doorway from the past,

back into the present. But as readers,

as readers, we do more than just eavesdrop on Wordsworth. We

