[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
Um, hi. So it's good to see you all, uh, this afternoon for this introduction to reading, drama and performance.

So that rather bland and innocuous lecture title conceals some of the conceptual and practical, uh, tensions that I'd like us to unpack today.

We're thinking about drama and performance. Why do we need two terms?

Here is one for text and another for staged embodiment.

Note that we often use the word play for both a script that we can hold in our hands,

and a live event that alters with each staging, and which takes on new forms with every, uh, production.

Any encounter with a play is on some level incomplete in its written form.

It lacks the embodiment of performance for which it is, uh, designed.

But then any given performance can only ever achieve one set of embodied possibilities afforded by the written text,

with its promise of endless iterations of staged realisation.

So the play is a fugitive form. And what does it mean to read these forms?

Drama and performance. Reading the written text of drama might seem quite straightforward.

Um, though I'm guessing in your lectures and classes so far this term, you've been learning that reading is actually anything but straightforward.

But given that reading is primarily the act of perusing written or printed matter, what does it mean to read performance?

How might we translate our apprehension of the spoken words, actors, bodies, sound and lighting effects,

set designs and costumes and other theatrical matter into an act of reading?

I'm going to suggest that we do that partly by recognising the need to read both

drama and performance a little differently from other forms of literature.

It's perhaps helpful to know that the etymology of our word theatre comes from the Greek word theatre, meaning place of looking.

This route cautions us to be mindful of the visual meanings and pleasures of watching a performance.

Details that aren't always immediately obvious to us when we read the wordy matter of a text.

Digging etymologically deeper, we find that both theatre and theory share the same Greek roots,

which has two meanings the abstract observation and examination um,

as well as the more specific being a spectator at a festival or theatrical performance.

And it's this duality that helps us with how we might start thinking about reading drama and performance,

whereby we need to negotiate between being a direct observer of specific events and more reflective theorisation.

So what exactly are the component parts of drama and performance that need reading?

In the 1960s, the theatre critic, playwright and performer Eric Bentley came up with a formula to describe what happens in theatre.

A impersonates B while C looks on.

Now. For all its elegant simplicity, this description flags some of the complexity we have to grapple with as students of literature.

When analysing drama, we're not just dealing with a two way dynamic between readers and texts here.

Instead, the actor intervenes and we have to consider how that actually presence makes meaning.

So when reading dramatic texts, we need to be alert to the different ways in which actors might present the roles that they read.

But if the actor is a crucial presence, so too is the audience.

Bentley's formula helpfully indicates the way that theatrical performance depends upon an audience for its existence.

As scholars of this form, we have to think about how a drama addresses itself to the audience,

how it elicits sympathies, uh, and antipathies, how it's communicating itself to that audience.

No. Also the verbs in this formula.

The rather passive nature of looking on might encourage us to reflect on the power dynamics at play in theatre,

where the audience is both the judge of the performance but also the passive recipients of the entertainment.

The more active. The impersonates reminds us that drama is generally thought to be a mimetic form that is an act of imitation,

something that isn't real but always at a representational remove from reality, not representational.

Remove is really kind of key for thinking about how theatre works,

so this is a helpful description to keep in mind as you work on drama and performance.

But part of its helpfulness also stems from thinking about its limitations as a minimalist formula.

For example, what happens when C becomes a group of different people?

And where does the author fit in this equation? Are playwrights less important than poets and novelists?

Today, I want to introduce you to a fuller framework for thinking about reading drama and performance.

Now, obviously, uh, lots of different theories, uh,

that you encounter when reading other forms of literature and also apply, uh, to drama, uh, perfectly valid,

obviously, to think about, uh, Marxism or queer theory, disability studies,

eco criticism, or any number of the other theories that you have or will encounter.

But I want to talk about two theories that have been particularly important for understanding drama in performance.

Um, semiotics and phenomenology. So let's start with the first of those.

Semiotics or the study of signs. Semiotics or semi ology investigates how meaning is communicated.

So it recognises that signs can take lots of different forms.

So words of course, but also images and behaviour.

Now the leading figure in this field is Ferdinand de Saussure,

whose work in linguistics as a structuralist involved working to undertake scientific

and objective analysis of the basic patterns that underpin cultural activities.

Okay, so he's constantly trying to think about how you can turn various different kinds of cultural activities into um, meaning communicated by signs.

So those working in theatre semiotics are taking that approach to drama.

They're looking for systematic ways of understanding how meaning is made.

Um, so clear alarm, for example, argues that all that is on the stage is a sign.

So he categorises different classes of theatrical signs and creates really kind of detailed charts, uh, to depict complex processes of communication.

Um, so he's really systematising the ways in which meaning is made and sort of turning it almost into a scientific process.

Other semi-solid chests, a move away from a focus on the big picture of how all theatrical meaning is made,

to looking at really specific examples, uh, to analyse what's going on in a given moment, in a performance.

For our purposes, semiotics is a useful framework for thinking about drama and performance,

because it helps us to identify in a really quite sort of rigorous, uh,

and precise way the different features that make meaning, uh, when a play staged.

Um, so today's, uh, cause, um, identified 13 different selling systems that produce meaning in stage drama.

So we have words. So that's the dialogue, uh, that actors speak, uh, on the stage, the delivery of the text.

So the means or the way in which the actor is delivering those lines.

Facial expression, gestures, the movement of actors, uh, makeup, hairstyle, costume properties, sets, lighting, music and sound effects.

So for Kazan, um, theatrical signs are either actor related or space related.

The things that emanate from the actor's body and voice.

So language or gesture or the the things that are generated from the stage.

Uh, so that would include things like props and sets. The itemisation is pretty helpful as a rubric for the kind of visual and our features.

Uh, you might attend to when analysing the meaning produced by play and performance.

Uh, so you could use this list as a, as a sort of tool kit, uh, for, uh, attending an appropriate detail, uh, to a productions features.

So just to test that out so you can sort of see it in practice.

Um, this is an image, uh, from a production of the 1990s, uh, play, uh, Federers Love by Sarah Kane.

Now, Kane's play is a response to a classical story, and the first scene opens in a royal palace with the prince.

Uh, Hippolytus. Uh, so you can see an image of this, uh, uh, performance on the slide there.

So I'm going to read you the beginning of what's actually a really lengthy opening stage direction in this text.

Hippolyta sits in a darkened room watching television.

He is sprawled on a sofa, surrounded by expensive electronic toys, empty, crisp and sweet packets, and a scattering of used socks and underwear.

He is eating a hamburger. His eyes fixed on the flickering lights of a Hollywood film.

He sniffs. He feels a sneeze coming on and rips his nose to stop it.

It still irritates him. He looks around the room and picks up a sock.

He examines the sock and carefully blows his nose on it.

He throws the sock back on the floor and continues to eat the hamburger.

The film becomes particularly violent. Hippolytus watches impassively.

Now the first of Kazan signs.

Uh, words don't actually appear here.

There's no dialogue in this opening scene, but that absence is, in and of itself, significant.

We know we're not in the traditional world of great heroes who speak soaring rhetoric.

Instead, Kane's prince embodies a kind of banality, and his silence speaks to the emptiness at the core of his character.

This royal palace isn't an elevated platform from which the protagonist can fall.

Instead, the theatrical signifiers represent consumption both in terms of an endless consuming of things and also a kind of sickness.

So in Cain's vision of modern royalty, a kind of decadent listlessness prevails.

The stage is literally littered with the rubbish of modern life.

The darkened room, lit by the flickering light of a violent movie,

conveys that kind of enervating role that multimedia has played in stripping this character of any meaningful life.

Hippolytus is a consumer surrounded by the trappings of modern Western society.

Um, so watching television, consuming loads of junk food, uh, playing on, on various gadgets and he's,

he's gorging himself on hamburgers, he's gorging himself on, uh, Hollywood violence as if the two were kind of disturbingly equivalent.

But note that these trivial gestures are semiotic.

Meaningful. Very precise stage direction.

Going through that detail of being irritated by a sneeze that doesn't come really effectively registers the banality of Hippolytus.

Is life a life in which blowing his nose and eating are almost one in the same thing, sort of excreting and consuming become the same action.

Um, now, just to warn you, if you do decide to read this play, it's extremely graphic in its depiction of sex and violence.

Even in the very first scene, um, in her own time,

Kane was reviled by many newspaper theatre critics for being too shockingly explicit and relentless in her staging of cruelty.

Um, but I think her careful control of the semiotics of her drama reveals the thoughtfulness behind this bleak and even, uh, quite frightening drama.

Nevertheless, I think this this opening scene perhaps also cautions us about some of the the risks and the challenges,

uh, that are involved in taking on too narrowly, uh, a semiotic approach.

You'll remember that the first item in that list of theatrical signs that we looked at was words.

Given that the field is rooted in linguistics, it's perhaps not surprising that council should prioritise words at the top of his list.

And indeed, you might all agree, uh, that language is the most important category of theatrical sign.

But as this scene, uh, shows, words aren't necessarily needed to make meaning in performance.

And even when words are spoken, are we sure that they are conveying more meaning to the audience than other items in the list?

Have you ever been in a play and just not followed the words?

Just allowed your mind to drift as the actors continue to speak?

What kinds of meaning have you taken from the performance?

By thinking about the costume, or the set design, or other elements of performance?

Um, you often see this in performances of Shakespeare plays where our audiences,

who aren't necessarily grasping the finer details of Elizabethan language,

nevertheless get a dirty joke, because an actor's able to do physical gestures that make it clear what's going on.

Um, cousins list certainly isn't comprehensive.

Um, so Martin Aslin, also taking a semiotic approach to drama, points out to function as a sign.

The sign must, above all, be recognised as a sign, marked as a sign.

The frame of a picture, the signpost on which the street sign is exhibited.

The act of making eye contact with the person to whom a speech is addressed are the basis of all communication.

So for Aislinn, another important category of signs is that which we encounter before the play even begins the theatrical framing.

Um, so that would actually include, uh, theatrical architecture itself.

Take, for example, the Royal Opera House in London.

Um, so this is what's known as a proscenium arch theatre.

So that's where the stage is framed, uh, by a curtained archway.

And that quite firmly separates off the fictional space on the stage.

Uh, what's being depicted in performance from the audience in the auditorium?

By contrast, the Olivier Theatre within the National Theatre, uh,

National Theatre Complex has an open stage with seats in the huge auditorium running around it in an amphitheatre like structure.

So obviously the sightlines in these two theatres are very different.

And that's going to affect how, um, audiences interact with the theatrical signs being presented there.

Think about the other kinds of semiotic work being done by that architecture,

to the opulence of the Royal Opera House elevates the status of the performances being staged there.

And you're well aware of your position in the theatre's hierarchy,

where if you've got seats at a really awkward angle to the stage, or if you're in the stalls and are really close to it.

The 1970s architecture of the Olivier Theatre, with its encircling structure of comfortable seats, makes for a much more democratic experience,

even as its naming after a theatrical great and its structural homage to ancient Greek theatre is also insisting on a kind of status.

Um. Nevertheless, the size that comes along with that status and the Olivier seats over a thousand people.

Um, that also produces distance. And actors talk of feeling like they're acting in a well.

A very different kind of frame is produced by the intimate black box studio style of theatre.

So here, close proximity and a pared down aesthetic offer a more intimate or perhaps riskier connection between audiences and actors,

and place extra emphasis on minimal props and sets.

Of course, theatrical frames change over time.

When studying plays from the early modern period. For example, it's important to be aware that plays are performed in outdoor playhouses,

which were staged in front of audiences who were not plunged into darkness as they are in modern theatres.

Um, in those modern theatres, that kind of dark, uh, auditorium is firmly separating the audience from the actors,

focusing attention on the, on the stage, um, and, um, kind of creating a different kind of dynamic.

In the early modern theatres. Audiences are aware of one another as well as the actors.

So you've got a different kind of experience because of that shared light.

Um, so think of how the dynamic of A impersonating B while C watches R might change if C is really aware of itself and can sort of see,

uh, and audiences can see one another. In the early modern playhouses, Lit by candlelight offered more opportunities for lighting effects,

but the audience still remained visible to one another.

Now, obviously, these last two, uh, photographs that I've shown you on, uh, the slides here, um, actually,

of early modern playhouses, but rather they are modern reconstructions of early modern playhouses.

Uh, so I've shown you the globe and the some Wanamaker Playhouse.

Um, and that creates a different kind of frame.

Again, when we attend plays in those spaces today, we are aware of a kind of heritage or historical frame,

uh, when we're using that space, even if that's kind of more subconscious.

Um, so my point here is that theatrical architecture is another sign to be analysed when reading a performance,

and it's a sign that conditions the other signs that make up a production.

You could think about a whole host of other, um, framing signs as well, uh,

such as the kind of the entrance to the theatre, the promotional material to the play, the program.

Um, so there's lots of opportunities for thinking about frame.

Moving inside the frame, though Aislinn also encourages us to recognise the particular significance of the actor as a sign.

So he points out that the actor is the iconic sign par excellence, a real human being who has become a sign for a human being.

Now, before we think about what it means for a person to behave like a sign, it's worth pausing to get to grips with some semiotic terminology here.

So following a model set up by Charles Sanders Peirce.

Theatre, some biologists distinguish classes of signs.

So we have iconic signs, which is where there's a similarity between the sign and the thing signified.

Um, so you can think there about the picture of, uh, or a sign of beware the dog, which features a picture of a dog.

That's an iconic sign. Indexical signs are ones where there is a kind of a spatial or a temporal connection between the sign and the thing signified.

Um, so an example. There would be smoke being used as a sign for fire.

And then we also have symbolic signs.

So this is where meaning has been established through convention.

Um, so words are actually symbolic signs.

The meaning of words has been established through, uh, conventions.

Um, they're connected to the thing they represent by custom.

Um, another example might be red, amber and green traffic lights.

So Aislinn is pointing out that the actor is an emphatic, iconic sign, a human being who is representing a human being.

So there's a really close connection between the sign and the referent here.

But that act of becoming a sign, rather than simply a human being, opens up all sorts of possibilities for meaning.

For Aislinn, it isn't just the way the actor uses that body and voice to represent a character that matters here, but rather, um,

it's the tension between the real actor on the one hand, and the fictional character for whom he functions as an iconic sign on the other.

That creates one of the main attractions of drama in performance.

The audience never forgets. The iconic function of the actor is playful pretence.

So for all that as an iconic sign, the actor is significantly very close to the thing they represent.

As Lynn suggests that that meaning is created because we don't straightforwardly just accept the sign for the thing itself.

We are aware that we're looking at a sign, and a meaning is made through the awareness of that distinction between actor and part.

So just to illustrate that, uh, to help make a bit more sense of it, just think about what happens.

Semiotic li when different actors take on a very famous part like hamlet.

So obviously what the actors do in that role will make meaning, right?

So the way they deliver the lines, the way they move around the stage, there's going to be all sorts of things that they do to make meaning as hamlet.

But so two does just simply the very act of them being cast in that role.

So think about how age, race, and gender affect the meaning of a role that has been traditionally played by a youngish white man.

Does anyone watching Jude Law play hamlet forget that they're watching a movie star as well as a theatre actor?

What difference does that make to the way hamlet works on stage?

How do the previous roles that these actors have played inform the meaning they bring to the part of hamlet?

Does everyone in the audience have exactly the same reaction to these actors?

And of course,

the meaning of all paths is dramatically shaped by casting and by the interplay of different casting decisions across a whole company of actors.

Think about how the relationships between characters is affected by the physical differences and similarities between the actors playing them.

So as I say, when we're when we're reading performance, we can be alert to the semiotics of casting.

But I'd like to conclude this section on semiotics by exploring how this mode of reading might illuminate.

A specific example from a dramatic text.

So the extract, which I'll read in a moment, is taken from one of Shakespeare's earliest plays, uh, the comedy, uh, Two Gentlemen of Verona.

So this is the story of two young men, uh, on the cusp of adulthood.

And the play is examining different rites of passage.

Um, so things that are kind of marking their transition, uh, from youth to adulthood.

It deals with education, falling in love and leaving home.

Uh, and pleasingly, it also features a dog.

So in the extract I'm about to read, uh, we have a soliloquy spoken not by one of the play's two gentlemen in the title,

but rather a clownish servant called Lance, who has to leave home at the same time as his master.

And he's here describing how distraught he is, um, at that moment of parting and how distraught his family were to.

So as I read this speech, I have to think about what might be going on at the level of theatrical signs.

Now I'll show you the manner of it. Taking off his shoes.

This shoe is my father. No, this left shoe is my father.

No, no, no. This left shoe is my mother. No, that cannot be so.

Neither. Yes, it is so. It is so. It has the worse sole.

This shoe with the hole in it is my mother. And this my father.

A vengeance on it. That is now, sir, this stuff is my sister for.

Look you. She is white as a lily and small as a wand.

This hat is. None are made. I am the dog.

No, the dog is himself and I am the dog. Oh, the dog is me and I am myself.

So here we have, um, Lance getting into something of a semiotic tangle like a pedantic semi ologist.

He's trying to parse the difference between, uh, different parts, uh, different forms of signs,

and he's seeking some kind of iconic relationship between the sign and the person that's being signified.

So he thinks the stuff is appropriate for his sister because it's skinny and pale, like she is, um, making a sexual joke.

The shoe that has a hole in it stands for his mother.

However, these likenesses are so comically remote as to poke fun at the act of representation itself.

Um, this is a joke about the way representation works, about the way signs stand in for other things.

And in fact, this is a really meta theatrical moment.

Um, so meta theatre is is a term, uh,

that we use to describe moments where theatre draws attention to its own artifice and kind of steps outside of itself.

Um, in this speech, Lance is rather explicitly laying bare the semiotic dynamics of theatrical storytelling,

even if his own storytelling is actually quite an expert.

There are actually many varied meta theatrical moments in the drama of Shakespeare and his contemporaries.

Um, so lots of scenes where drama seems to kind of reflect on its own form.

And that's probably because commercial theatres were a relatively new phenomenon in, uh, Renaissance London.

And so those writing for the stage seem to have been testing out how theatricality works, and the effect is ambivalent.

On the one hand, a scene like this seems to expose theatrical representation as being pretty weak.

Um, so it's a kind of foolish game in which we're asked to accept that a sign can stand in for something else.

But on the other hand, it's a game that works.

And Shakespeare's brash flaunting of artifice here is actually speaking to a real confidence that the audience are prepared to play the game,

to accept that A impersonates B. Lance his comic use of shoes and hats to stand in for members of his household.

Might be poor casting, but it also underlines the poly functionality of theatrical signs.

A world where a prop can very quickly change its meaning, and standing for something else in the shifting of a scene.

We might also note how the semiotic confusion of this scene is also part of its meaning.

At this moment, Lance is very anxious about leaving home and leaving his family.

And as he gets mixed up about what prop is playing,

which family member and who he is playing in that kind of theatrical retelling of this scene, the confusion sort of speaks his fear.

What happens to your identity when you leave home, when you have to play a new role as an adult?

Is there a danger of losing your identity and sense of self when you leave behind your loved ones?

Oh, the dog is me. Know also that the semiotic form of this soliloquy works rather differently from

the kinds of speeches we usually think of when we hear the term soliloquy.

Lance is no Hamlet or Macbeth. Looking inside himself, using words that communicate psychological depth.

Instead, he's looking outwards to props and costumes,

but his comical externalisation of his homesickness makes a serious point about selfhood that it isn't only located inwards,

but that it's shaped through our external relationship with the world and others in it.

Nevertheless, um, for all some scholars are working within theatre.

Semiotics have attempted to provide comprehensive and systematic accounts of how meaning is communicated in theatre.

Semiotics doesn't capture everything. So I'd like now to turn to another mode of thinking about what is happening in drama.

Um, and that's phenomenology. So this is a theory that's developed partly out of a dissatisfaction with semiotics.

So in an important book on the topic. Great reckonings in little rooms.

But O States explains that the problem with semiotics is that in addressing theatre as a system of codes,

it necessarily dissect the perceptual impression theatre makes on the spectator.

And as Merleau-Ponty has said, it is impossible to decompose a perception to make it into a collection of sensations,

because in it the whole is prior to the parts.

Moreover, the more one treats theatre as a language, the more like all languages it becomes.

Thus, the danger of a linguistic approach to theatre is that one is apt to look past the site of our sensory engagement with its empirical objects.

This site is the point at which art is no longer only language.

When the critic posits a division in the art image, he may be saying something about language,

but he is no longer talking about art, or at least about the affective power of art.

Okay, so the state's semiotics is a flawed method of understanding what happens when we watch performance,

because that act of classifying and analysing different signs misses out something more fundamental about perception, right?

He's saying you can't call that perception in that way.

In turning to phenomenology, States is actually interested in the parts of performance that can't be captured by that kind of classification,

that that sort of division into signs.

Instead, he's interested in the effects on the living body of the spectator and in the parts of performance that aren't reducible to signs.

So unlike a care alarm, who you remember kind of claims that absolutely everything on the stage is a sign.

Um, States argues that in performance, things like clocks and chairs and children and animals can't be read in that way.

Um, so I'm just going to focus on the example of animals, uh, to, to try and unpack that point.

So for him, the dog in The Two Gentlemen of Verona is a really good example of that resistance.

Right. The idea that the something more than just signs at play.

There is always the fact that it.

So the animal doesn't know it's in a play.

In productions of The Two Gentlemen of Verona, Lance's dog crab usually steals the show simply by being itself.

Anything the dog does. Ignoring lands, yawning, wagging its tail, forgetting its lines becomes hilarious or cute because it is dog like.

The whole enterprise of theatrical illusionism gets gently debunked.

The theatre has, so to speak, met its match.

The dog is blissfully above all beneath the business of playing, and we find ourselves cheering its performance precisely because it isn't warm.

Now note how states is reading of the staged animal complicates that formula.

A impersonates B while C looks on States points out that when A is a living dog,

it doesn't impersonate crab because it has absolutely no conception of acting,

and the audiences enjoyment of the scene is based largely around knowing that the dog is simply on stage while theatre happens around it.

Indeed, Shakespeare seen works hard to exploit that point.

The reason Lance has actually stopped to tell the audience about a story about leaving home is partly because he's really

cross that the dog crab hasn't been as emotionally invested in The Farewell as he and the rest of his family have been.

I think crab my dog be the Cyrus natured dog that lives.

My mother weeping, my father wailing. My sister crying or maid howling or cat wringing her hands and all our house in great perplexity.

Yet did not this cruel hearted cur shed one tear.

He is a stone, a very pebble stone, and has no more pity in him than a dog.

So all the all the family members have played their sad parts here, with even the cats comically and anthropomorphic Lee wringing her hands.

But in sharp contrast, the dog refuses to be anything but a dog.

And in the early modern period, much like now, dogs were celebrated for their loyalty.

Yet proverbially. Dogs were also said to have pity.

Sorry. To have no pity. Um. And so the joke here is that Lance is getting tangled in a tautology.

Blaming the dog for being like a dog and the stage dog's behaviour serves to make the speech even funnier.

Precisely because we know it isn't acting. If the dog wags his tail and barks, he seems impervious.

Happy. Proving Lance's point, if he simply stands there, or kind of lies on the on the stage or turns away,

he seems kind of brilliantly deadpan and again fits into the character that Lance is sketching.

Even if he kind of whines and seems mournful, there's an air of apology that seems to fit the narrative.

So I suppose in some ways the dog is contributing to the semiotic meaning in the moment,

but only because we know it isn't acting and that it isn't really a sign.

So there's a kind of phenomenological aspect that is pushing beyond the semiotic meaning.

No. For all that he critiques, the narrowness of semiotics states doesn't dismiss it altogether,

and instead he recommends a binocular vision whereby we pay attention to both semiotics and phenomenology.

So that theatrical interest in phenomenology is derived, um, from the philosophical movement that developed in the early 20th century,

which focussed not so much on the world as it exists, but rather on how we perceive it.

Okay, so it's that it's that function on purpose. Uh, it's that focus on perception again.

Right? Perception is the key, uh, thing at stake in phenomenology.

So a really important proponent of this school of thought was the French philosopher Merleau-Ponty.

He claimed to perceive is to render one's self present to something through the body.

And that centrality of the body as the medium through which experience is perceived is key to theatrical phenomenology,

which focuses on how understanding comes to us through the senses.

Um, so it's kind of in the way of being is always located in time and space.

Uh, and the way in which things kind of grow in size and importance with their sort of proximity to us.

So, again, that idea of bodily connection. So just to again try and illustrate that so you can kind of see how the theory works.

Uh, I'm going to use another Shakespearean example.

Um, as you might have guessed by now, my research focuses on Shakespeare, but but these, um, uh, theories apply to all different kinds of, uh, drama.

Um, so it has been nice for me at least to think about a dunking comedy, but I want to go a little bit bleaker now, uh, and have a look at tragedy.

So the extract we're looking at here is from King Lear, and this is a scene known as the Dover cliff scene at this moment in the play.

Um, the old man Gloucester has been blinded and he is suicidal.

Okay. So his eyes had been gouged out in an earlier torture scene.

Um. And he no longer wants to live.

So unbeknown to him, he is being led around, uh, by his son, Edgar.

Um, but because Edgar has been falsely accused of plotting against his father, he's in disguise.

So he's not telling his father who he is. So, um, here he is now, trying to help his father without him knowing.

Gloucester wants to be taken to Dover Cliffs so that he can throw himself off that cliff and kill himself.

When shall I come to the top of that same hill? You do climb it now.

Look how we labour. Methinks the ground is even horrible.

Steep! Hark! Do you hear the sea? No, truly.

Why, then your other senses grow imperfect by your eyes. Anguish.

So may be so. It may be indeed. Methinks thy voice is altered.

And thou speakest in better phrase and matter than thou didst.

You're much deceived in nothing am I changed but in my garments?

Methinks ye are better spoken. Come, sir.

Here's the place. Stand still. How fearful and deceit is to cast one's eyes so low.

Now for those watching this scene for the first time.

The audience, like Gloucester, have only got Edgar's words to go by, uh,

in order to kind of figure out how they're supposed to interpret what's happening on the stage.

So they see Edgar leading Gloucester over a flat stage.

But because Edgar is encouraging us and Gloucester to understand that surface is horrible,

steep, and a place so high that it makes you fearful and dizzy to look down.

We read that flat stage as if it's a sign for a hill or a cliff.

But then 33 lines later, Edgar explains in an aside to the audience, why I do trifle this with his despair is done to cure it.

So, in other words, Edgar is playing a theatrical game here.

The stage isn't a cliff after all. Edgar is just encouraging his father to believe that he's on Dover Cliff,

in the hope that he can kind of let him work through his suicidal depression in a safe space and move beyond it.

Now, the fact that the audience have to wait for this explanation makes us aware of the theatricality of that moment.

We have kind of thought that we needed to read the stage as one location, but now we know better.

We're in that world of poorly functional theatrical signs, and what happens next is a theatrically really awkward moment,

because Gloucester attempts to throw himself off a cliff that isn't there.

So the actor has to kind of stumble forward. There's not really an awful lot for him to do.

And then at that point, Edgar pretends to be yet another stranger, um,

standing at the bottom of the cliff as he watched him full, Gloucester remains miserable.

Um, so again, just think about phenomenology, right?

The place of bodies here. Uh, as I as I read this away and let me die.

Hast thou been aught but gossamer feathers? Uh, so many fathoms down.

Precipitating. That's shivered like an egg.

But thou dost breathe. Hast heavy substance.

Bleed us not speakest art sound ten mass at each make not the altitude which thou hast perpendicularly fell.

Thy life's a miracle. Speak yet again.

But have I fallen or no? From the dread summit of this chalky bone.

Look at the heights. The shrill, gorged lark so far cannot be seen or heard.

Do but look up. Alack, I have no eyes.

Is wretchedness deprived that benefit to end itself by death?

Twas yet some comfort. When misery could beguile the tyrant's rage.

And frustrate his proud will. Give me your arm up.

So how is it? Feel you. Your legs. You stand too well.

Too well. So Edgar tries to convince his father that he has experienced a miracle, that he threw himself off a cliff and lived.

He's hoping that by experiencing a literal tragic fall, his father will experience catharsis and be purged of his despair.

But you might note that Gloucester actually remains pretty resistant, miserable here.

He claims that he's uh oh. He complains that he's been denied suicide.

Uh, and he's so wretched because he's not even allowed to die.

He's upset that he can stand to well by the end of the full scene.

And good does manage to convince Gloucester to go on living, but he nevertheless dies of a broken heart before the end of the play.

So this theatrical miracle hasn't been very effective.

And maybe that's because Edgar has thought only about semiotics and not phenomenology.

His vivid description of the cliff and the fall all carefully signify a miraculous fall from a great height.

But Gloucester has a body that has experienced no such thing.

Um. His question. But have I fallen or no?

Makes it really clear that his senses haven't been fooled.

He might or might not accept the story this apparent stranger tells him.

But the theatrical trick hasn't been nearly as full as Edgar believes.

So no wonder Gloucester isn't really saved by it.

After all, Atticus seems to think only about the sense of sight and sound.

But since Gloucester, um, has no eyes, he can be convinced by spoken words.

But the body is proprioception, so its awareness of itself in space.

The time taken for a fool. The feeling of rushing air on the skin.

None of that has been considered. In its theatrical falseness.

The scene actually makes a different point about the centrality of the body to human experience and understanding

this broken and maimed body of the old man at the fundamental level of the senses hasn't been fooled.

And watching the actor kind of pathetically stumble on a flat surface does potentially

have a phenomenological effect on the audience who can find it a really awkward moment,

and so might be brought to a sort of visceral sympathy for this old man who is put through such an undignified, if well-meant trick.

So the theatre is producing an ethical connection between the actor and audience,

as it works out that interplay between semiotics and phenomenology and so on, that kind of nearly happy point.

I'll draw things to a close there, but I hope you enjoy working on drama and performance throughout your course.

Thank you.

