[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
Hi, folks. Uh. Hi, folks.

Hello. Let's see if I can get the microphone to be a vaguely sensible angle for somebody as short as me.

Okay, so for those of you who haven't met me already, I'm Helen Appleton.

And for the next four weeks,

I'm going to be doing these lectures which are introducing you to the context of the old English set texts for prelims paper two.

So we have four Old English set texts, as I'm sure you all know. Dream of the road, a Bit of Beowulf, Wanderer and the Battle of Malden.

And you're going to have much more detailed commentary lectures on all of those in Hilary.

I'm thinking much more about the poetics and style specifically.

So these four lectures are going to be much more about cultural and literary context.

And hopefully with these and with Daniel's lectures on the poetics, you'll be all kind of equipped for thinking in detail about commentary next term.

So I'm going to sew each one of these on the context of each of the commentary texts,

but hopefully it will also give you some things that you want to think about for your essays.

So this week we're starting with dream of the root or The vision of the cross, as it's called in some editions.

So dream of the reach survives to us in a single manuscript called The Kelly Book,

and it's called The Holy Book because it is located in virtually in northern Italy.

We're not entirely sure how a manuscript that's completely written in Old English ended up in the north of Italy,

but it's been there since the early medieval period, and it's very likely that it was carried with a pilgrim on their way to Rome,

because Pacelli is on the pilgrimage route,

and we have lots of evidence for English travellers going backwards and forwards to Rome throughout the early medieval period.

The book. We we often talk about it as one of our great poetic codices, one of our books, uh, principal books of Old English poetry.

But actually a lot of the manuscript is prose, and it's Old English homilies.

So Old English preaching texts and the poems in the book are interspersed in between them.

So we start off with five prose homilies, and then we have the poem Andreas,

which is about Saint Andrew going as an apostle to an island inhabited by cannibals called the murmur.

Donations. And then he has to rescue the prisoners that they're going to eat and then, um,

convert the moment Ionians through this terrifying combination of of fire and flood and preaching fates of the apostles,

is also about the apostles, but it's more or less like a poem that deals with all of them in sequence.

And that's by one of the few named poets whose name we can actually attached to their works.

And that's Coonamble. And then we're back into homilies, um, for another chunk of the manuscript, and then we get Soul and Body one,

which is one of the two poems in Old English in which the soul returns to the body after death,

and it's the soul of a sinful person, and it berates the body for having led astray during life.

And we have another sort of fragmentary Homer etic poem.

And then we get dream of the rood, which is our set text, and then we get another chunk of homilies.

And then the poem Eleanor, which is about the finding of the true cross.

So Saint Helena, the mother of the Emperor Constantine, going to the Holy Land and trying to identify the True Cross and retrieve it for Rome.

And then the manuscript ends with a text that's usually called homily 23, but is actually an abbreviated version of the life of Saint Kislak,

who's an, uh, saint from the Fenland in Lincolnshire, who gets taken bodily to [INAUDIBLE] and then rescued by his mentor, Saint Bartholomew.

So all very exciting stuff at the end of the book there.

So it's quite an eclectic manuscript and its purpose isn't clear to us.

It differs from the other major collections, both of Old English poetry and of Old English homilies that we have surviving from this period,

because it has this mixture of preaching material and poetic material, and the preaching material doesn't seem to be in any obvious logical order.

It's not following the church calendar for the year, which is what we tend to see in these big manuscripts of homilies.

There's also some repetition of material there, more than one homily for the same occasion in the book.

So the kind of rationale for selection is tricky to work out.

And. Although it's the work of one scribe, we know that there's a huge amount of, um, different material coming in, um, to this manuscript.

So it's the one scribe is copying multiple sources. Um.

I mean, we could just do. What?

Um, Don Spragg, who's the editor of the weekly homilies, does and kind of gives up, um, and says that it's basically random.

Um, but perhaps it's more productive to try and think about the book in the way that Eamon Carrigan has done.

He talks about it as an example of a monastic genre of ascetic florals, a kind of assemblages of ascetic texts.

And he describes as one man's book. So he thinks about it as a personal manuscript that belonged to an individual pilgrim and

was spiritually edifying for them to take as travel reading on their journey to Rome.

And Francis Lenihan has also talked about it in this way, thinking about it as a manuscript which expresses the mixed life.

So a mixture of contemplation and teaching.

So two different kinds of spiritual work, and that perhaps fits extremely well for thinking about the dream of the rood.

Don Scruggs analysis of the book, um, tells us that it's put together, as I said,

over a period of time, and it's put together from at least five different sources.

And it also seems to be a project that changed structure partway through.

So when we look at the manuscript, we can see points where, um, whatever the original plan was, was adjusted, and we get evidence of that.

With the opening of The Dream of the Reed. So here is in the manuscript.

Um, we don't have any laser pointers in this building, and there is absolutely no way that I can reach up to that.

But hopefully you can see the capital H of, um, at the beginning over there on the right hand side.

So this is from the digitised version of the Michelli book, which there's a link to on the handout,

which is available to all of you on canvas, so you can go and browse through it at your leisure.

So if we look at it, you can see that the opening of the poem and the first chunk, um,

is spaced differently from the continuation of the poem over on the right hand side of the image here.

And this shows that there's been a change of plan because the poem straddles two different booklets.

So medieval manuscripts are made up of individual booklets, individual choirs assembled together.

Um, the poem dream of the road bridges between two of those booklets.

And as you can see, delineation, the number of lines on the page, changes between the two sides.

What we don't know is whether, um, the left hand side was copied first and then the plan changed, or whether the right hand side was copied first,

and then they realised they'd got space at the end of the other booklet to fit the beginning of the poem in.

And so they did that. But we can see this kind of work in progress.

Changes of ideas happening here, but also, as you can see from looking at dream of the rood in its manuscript context,

Old English poetry is not laid out in its manuscripts as it is in our editions in Mitchell and Robinson.

So you'll notice that the punctuation is really minimal,

but probably most obviously that we don't have it set out in neat, poetic lines with big wide spaces.

Your. As for the half lines, we have it written fairly continuously.

Across the page. And this is a cultural norm.

So Latin poetry is usually limited in verse lines.

Old English is written out using different conventions.

Um, and if you're interested in the way that first is written out,

you can have a look at Rachel Burns's new book, thinking about the way that they they set out.

But it's important to remember when you're thinking about these commentary texts,

how much editorial intervention there has been in the text that you're working with in Mitchell Robinson.

So you don't want to be commenting on things like punctuation because they are not integral to the poem.

Those are editorial choices. So this is the Shelley book.

Produced. In southern England around the year 970, and we date medieval manuscripts largely based on the style of handwriting.

So there are changes in scribal hands over time, and that enables us to sort of localise the production.

It's written in a later West Saxon dialect of Old English, which is what we'd expect from a manuscript from the later 10th century.

But when we look at the texts within it, including dream of the rood,

we see linguistic features that don't belong to that West Saxon dialect, which suggests that the texts.

Uh, earlier, perhaps quite a lot earlier than the manuscript, and that they potentially came from a different part of what becomes England.

Although, of course, Old English poetry is also conservative because it's alliterative.

And so there's all these kind of complicating factors in terms of thinking about the dates of our poems.

And generally speaking, unless we actually have a specific reference to a historical event in a text,

we're making these relatively subjective judgements about dating based on language based on meta.

But occasionally we do have more than one copy of a text, and we have an earlier copy.

And potentially that's what we have with dream of the read.

So this is not a manuscript. This is a monumental stone cross, the Red cross, um, which was probably made in the eighth century.

Um, has visual narratives on several of the sides.

But on this particular side, you can see here uninhabited vine scroll.

And this is really, really typical, um, of sculpture of this period, all the lovely little creatures nibbling on, on fruits.

And originally this would have been brightly coloured.

The creatures would probably have had glass eyes, so it would have been a really visually arresting monument.

So which I've put a little pin in the map for you is now in Scotland.

It's in, um, Dumfries and Galloway.

But that area of Scotland was part of the Kingdom of Northumbria in the eighth century, when we think the cross was carved.

So it's part of, of that sort of Northumbrian cultural world.

And the reason the, um, dreamers throughout and the River cross are connected is the runic letters that hopefully you can see

running alongside of the vine scrolls in the borders seem to be quoting parts of the dream of the rood.

So this is item two on the handout, the whole of it. But for example, the runes say Christie was on the road, Sara H was made, so drove it.

So it does seem to be deemed rude, but it's also clearly in an earlier form of Old English and in a different dialect of Old English.

And it's also only quoting the parts where the cross is speaking.

So the relationship between dream of the as we have it in the book and the Russell Cross is potentially quite complicated.

It's very, very difficult to date. The runic inscription, um, is it eighth century like the sculpture?

Is it something that someone has added later to the cross?

Because the other cross is only quoting parts of dream, the rood where the cross is speaking.

Does whoever carved this onto the cross know the same version of the poem that survives to us?

Lots of lots of questions.

It's a really beautiful and significant monument with lots of visual storytelling, as well as that quotation from dream of the rood.

So you get scenes on the, um, from the New Testament Annunciation, the crucifixion.

Um, we also get scenes that come from saints lives, the hermits Saint Paul and Anthony, on one face of it,

and, um, the beasts adoring Christ, which is a sort of conventional iconography, but not in Scripture.

So it's a really, really significant visual monument. So you can think a lot about the the interaction between text and image with the Red cross.

But we also have another object that connects to dream of the red.

And it's another cross. You will detect. Detect a theme.

So this is an object that, um, post dates the Michelli book.

So this is the Brussels cross and it's called that because it's in Brussels.

As you can see, we're really imaginative with our naming of both texts and objects.

It's, uh. Silver gilded procession, Rick Ross.

So it's a really, really big cross that is designed to be carried at the front of a liturgical procession on a big pole.

So it's kind of an enormous thing that people would follow along.

Behind and around the outside of the Brussels Cross is an inscription which tells us it's dedication.

And again, this is on your handout number three,

if you want to have a look at it later and it says track Maumee road is manana Yale it's Regina bear defender blue.

Damn it, that's road head. I'll work in an awful world.

His brother Crystal love for Alf Richardson.

Well, he had a brother. So we have a text, um, with a little prose text that frames a couple of lines that seem to come from dream of the road,

um, which dedicates this cross. Um, it's produced by two brothers.

I feel modern as a world, um, as a sort of commemoration for the their deceased brother Alfred.

And it has this little again, a quote from the cross speaking fraud is banana around the outside.

So we have this sort of another physical cross quoting the speaking cross of the poem.

So we have a monumental stone cross creating it.

We have a procession, we cross, but there are loads of other different kinds of cross that we get in surviving from early medieval England.

So the cross is an incredibly important symbol for early medieval Christianity,

and it's something that people would have encountered all over the place in all kinds of situations and in various different scales.

Um, so as well as those large crosses, we also have kind of small individual crosses that people would have worn as devotional jewellery.

And again, this is referenced within the poem. But this is a little pectoral cross um from Trumpington.

It's now in Cambridge. Um, universe of museums I think. So a very small little object, but exquisitely manufactured with gold and uncut garnets.

And you can see where we're missing some of the garnets.

The gold beneath the inset garnets has been scored to make, um, it extra sort of reflective of light.

So it's a very sort of bright and shiny and illuminated, um, little object.

Really, really beautiful craftsmanship. So loads of different kinds of crosses being evoked within the poem.

So really connecting the text to the material world to the visual culture of its audience.

So let's have a look a bit further at the road and think about what actually happens in it.

So here we have, roughly speaking, the structure of the poem.

So we begin with the opening address from our dreamer.

Um, and the classic opening word what? Which begins so many old English poems.

And the dreamer tells us that they're going to tell us about their dream.

And then we're told their vision of a tree, which shifts in appearance and is gold and jewelled and bloody.

And we have this very confusing assemblage of visual imagery, which is quite difficult for us to construct into a coherent whole, very deliberately.

And the dreamer is understandably quite troubled by this confusing vision.

But then the tree starts to speak. And then in the centre of the problem, we move into the words of the tree of the Bam.

The cross, the rood and the cross narrates for us its history, beginning with being cut down from its, um, original um.

Sort of home and then being fashioned into a cross all the way through the crucifixion,

we get the burial of Christ, we get the burial of the crosses, and it's recovery and adornment.

So you can read these kind of connections across the manuscript. We get this miniature version of this narrative and dream of the rood,

and then a much more extended treatment of the finding of the True Cross in Eleanor later in the manuscript.

And then, um, the cross explains its role as a symbol.

So it's the narrative of its life, and then it's its function, and then it tells the dreamer how to respond,

the vision and the dreamers instructed to tell all people about the vision they've had,

so that those people can also benefit from the cross and be amongst the righteous on the day of judgement.

And then the end of the poem gives us the dreamers response.

So they pray to the cross, and they look forward to death, and to departing from this world and enjoying the joys of heaven.

And then the poem ends with the dreamer articulating that they have placed their hope in Christ,

and then describing the harrowing of how when Christ, um, descends into [INAUDIBLE] and rescues the souls that have been trapped there.

So that's, um. The sequence of the poems we have very deliberately confusing beginning.

We have narrative that kind of clarifies what's going on. We then have instruction about what to do with the narrative,

and then we have at the end our little dream of modelling for us how we should respond to what's happened earlier in the poem,

and why it's a sort of spiritually valuable exercise.

So that's looking at Jamie, the read as a whole. So now I thought I'd look at some of the contexts for aspects of dream of the root.

And I'm going to start by thinking about dreams, because we're told very, um, clearly at the beginning of the poem, what each Swiss anarchist said.

Shangri-La. I'm going to talk about the best, the choicest of dreams.

There are huge number of dreams. Um. Out there in the the culture of early medieval England.

Obviously, it's a very Christian culture and there are numerous examples of dreams in biblical context.

You can think about the dreams of Pharaoh, dreams of Nebuchadnezzar.

Um, and so they have all of that sort of Christian, um, spiritual framework for dreams available to them.

There are also, um, various dream and visionary texts with very specific English context in both Latin and Old English.

Um, so a little Latin poem de about a verse is quite a lot of visions in it.

Um, from much later than dream of the read. We have the in Old English the vision of lay a rich who's very pious alderman.

He has several visionary experiences. Um, but we also have a really specific association between dreams and Old English poetry.

And that comes from Bede's story of the poet Cadman.

So this is a story that B tells us in book four of his ecclesiastical history, and he sort of explains the origins of Old English religious verse.

And he tells us the story of the monk cabman, um, who's in the monastery at Whitby in Northumbria.

So the key kind of intellectual and cultural centre, and the place from which a lot of this early Old English verse seems to originate.

And we're told, um. That cabman, you know, isn't an educated man.

Um, and he feels very kind of inadequate about his ability to perform at the feast.

So B tells us that when they have a feast at the monastery, um, and everybody's supposed to sort of sing something in earnest,

it's kind of you do your little party because, um, Cadman, uh, tends to kind of do a runner at that point.

Um, and Hide and Beat tells us that on one occasion, cabman um has seen seeing the harp coming his way,

and he's gone and hidden out in, um, with the cattle, um, in in the barn.

In the bar, because he's responsible for looking after the cattle.

And that also tells us a bit about cabin status within the monastery.

He's somebody who's doing the farming. He's doing the practical work.

He's not somebody who's doing the intellectual work or copying manuscripts in scriptorium.

To be tells us that cabinet has gone off to hide with the cattle and then beat says, And I'm giving you coal grade from miners.

Translation of of the Latin.

In due time he stretched himself out and went to sleep, whereupon he dreamt that someone stood by him, saluted him, and called him by name.

Cadman. He said, sing me something. Cabman answered, I cannot sing.

That is why I left the feast and came here, because I could not sing.

Once again the speaker said. Nevertheless you must sing to me.

What must I sing? Said Cadman. Sing, he said, about the beginning of created things.

Thereupon cabman began to sing verses which he had never heard before, in praise of God the creator.

And of course, that gives us our most copied, most widely disseminated, most widely known Old English poem.

Um. Cabman had long hair. And now should we praise um, which is all about the creation.

So we have embedded in old English poetic culture.

Um, dreams and dreaming and ideas of poetry and revelation.

So that gives us a context for dreaming the read.

As a dream. So now back to the rude part of the poem with the double.

Um, thinking about depictions of crosses again.

So there are a lot of, as I was suggesting, there are a lot of context and allusions to different types of cross all the way through.

I'm dream of the route. Um. And there's a huge variety of crosses surviving from early medieval material

culture that gives us some idea of how rich and diverse cross imagery could be.

Um, this is a lovely little, um, ivory reliquary cross, which, as you can see, the Lamb of God in the centre.

They're carrying a cross. So it's a cross within a cross. And then you've got the symbols of the four evangelists at the end of each limb.

So we have these sort of material crosses that people would interact with,

that they'd wear, that they'd handle, that they'd see in processions and in church.

Um, but we also obviously get in dream of the rood, the image of, um, crosses in the sky.

And our dreamer tells us that she saw a silly trail on lift land.

And it seemed to me I saw most wonderful tree raised in the air.

So what do we do with images of crosses in the sky?

Um. There's a lovely cross in the sky for you. Um, from a mausoleum in Ravenna.

So this is a late antique masterpiece mosaic and a very beautiful building from the fifth century.

And Ravenna is a place that people from early medieval England would have visited.

Um. There's, as I said, there's lots of travel to Rome.

There's lots of interactions with Italy and late antique art, and in particular the art of Ravenna.

We can see influencing the art that's produced in early medieval England.

And again, you can see the evangelists symbols there, um, surrounding the cross.

So crosses in the sky like this one.

Arguably the most famous cross in the sky in the Christian tradition is the vision of the Emperor Constantine,

which is obviously very important to Christianity because it leads to Christianity becoming

the religion of Imperial Rome and institutionalised and growth and all of those things.

So the story of the vision of Constantine, summarised briefly, is that before the battle of the Milvian Bridge,

which is an incredibly important battle for Constantine's career, which took place in 83 um 312, Constantine had a vision of the cross.

And so this is the battle that Constantine wins, and which then enables him to become sort of sole ruler of the Roman Empire.

And we're told, um, that he has this, this vision which appears to him.

And one of the texts of that comes from the actor Syriac.

I'll just read you the translation. And we're told that same night a most splendid man came and roused him, and said, Constantine, do not fear,

but look up into the heavens, and behold, and looking up into the sky, he saw the sign of the cross of Christ made out of bright light.

And above were written the words in this conquer.

So the cross appears to Constantine. He adopts it as his symbol for the battle.

He's been victorious in the battle. And then, because it's the cross of Christ, he adopts Christianity.

And Christianity sort of becomes the religion of Rome.

So goes the narrative of the vision of Constantine. And this is an incredibly well known story across the early medieval Christian world.

So thinking about crosses in the sky for a reader dream, the reader is going to bring up those associations with the vision of Constantine.

But the cross in the sky isn't necessarily a positive image.

It's also a potential sign of the oncoming apocalypse.

Although that's perhaps more common in later texts.

So we might have a situation where a very early reader of dream of the rood is going to be thinking about the vision of Constantine.

But a reader of dream of the rood encountering it in the book might find a cross in the sky somewhat more concerning,

because they're more used to seeing it in that kind of apocalyptic context.

And we get a sort of clearer explication of that in another Old English poem found in another one of our major manuscripts,

the Exeter Book, which I'll talk about more in a couple of weeks. And this is a poem called Christ's Three.

It's the third poem in that manuscript on Christ again. Really good at imaginative titles, anyway.

It's a poem about Judgement Day. But Christ three um tells us, um, that Judgement Day is coming and it lists all of the things that you can see,

all of the trumpets and the fire and the troops. Um, and then it says, one of the things that you can see is on sale Hay Road, Rectory Road.

Riches. Tobacco. None. Um.

And the high cross raised upright, um, as a beacon of power.

So it's very much one of the kind of final significant signs of the apocalypse in that section of Christ.

Three. So crosses in the sky can be quite frightening things.

And we also know that people really did see crosses in the sky.

So we have this entry from the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle, um, for the year seven, seven, four, which talks about looking up to the sky, um, and seeing um.

A cross hair of fewer than a mile on half.

Okay. And before you think that this is little early medieval people hallucinating things.

This is a solar flare. And we've got quite a lot of evidence from other sources that that this cross did genuinely appear.

And this is a description of a solar flare from the Chronicle.

Likewise, when the Chronicle talks about seeing fiery dragons in the sky, um, that's it.

Describing looking at the northern lights, which, of course, we all failed to see last night because it was incredibly cloudy again.

Um, so we have to sort of think about, you know, they are sort of writing scientifically about what they're seeing,

but they're doing it often through, um, imagery.

That is sort of more culturally familiar anyway. So some poor people did see A cross in the sky in seven, seven, four.

But I digress. Um, let's get back to material crosses that we can actually handle.

So. With dream of the rood.

We have this intangible cross in the sky that's potentially existing, um, at the apocalypse, the vision of Constantine kind of moving across time.

And it creates this kind of question of kind of when is now, when is the present of the poem?

But that cross is also a material cross, and we have this confusing blend of material and immaterial things in the poem as it

moves between the concrete and the abstract in a way that's deliberately designed,

um, to induce confusion and wonder and convey the marvel of the cross.

Um, so we get, for example, this very material description of the cross in Dream of the rood.

Um, you say it's Wilderness trail. While the aware of that, we in the machine and a year older.

Jim must have done very well in this trail.

And this is an image that seems very much like, um, an altar cross misses a reconstruction of the cross from the Staffordshire Hoard,

which obviously survives to us all, kind of twisted and, um,

crushed because it's being valued for its, uh, its metal content rather than its religious symbolism.

Um, but that's, that's Vikings we. So we have the sense that the poem is evoking for us potentially.

Um, and across. And so thinking about how crosses were treated in churches, how people thought about the materials that made up a church cross,

might be helpful for us in understanding the dream of the rood.

And we do have a formula that describes how you consecrate a cross,

which helps us to understand how you're supposed to think about materials that make up.

And this is a little formula that survives in a manuscript that we call the Pontifical of Egbert.

And he was the Archbishop of York in the sort of mid eighth century.

And a pontifical is a sort of manuscript that collects various different formulas and writes and things that it would be useful for a bishop to know.

It's kind of, you know, helpful aide memoire, um, guide assemblage of bishop stuff.

And it talks about how you consecrate a cross and it's a little Latin text that

you're supposed to sort of say over the cross as part of the consecration ritual.

And it translates as, let the splendour of your only begotten son radiate here in gold.

Let the glory of his passion shine forth in the wood.

Let the redemption of all death glow in the cross and the purification of our life in the splendour of the crystal.

So as it's consecrating, as the Bishop is consecrating the cross,

the bishop is addressing all of the material elements that make up the cross, but explaining and articulating their spiritual significance.

So although this is a very expensive, very prestige object. That ornament, that artifice, is all about conveying a spiritual message.

It's about looking as dream of the reed tells us through the gold.

So we have in dream the route across in the sky a gold cross.

But we also have the cross as a bleeding tree.

And we get lots of descriptions of the blood in the poem.

You know, I'm always tempted when I'm reading dream of the read to think about the description of the five gems and the five wounds of Christ.

Especially because when you look at the way that garnet is often used, the gemstone is obviously blood red.

But that does seem to be a later sort of devotional tradition than dream of the Red.

So, um, these sort of fives are still up for for discussion.

Anyway, so we have this image, um, of the blood appearing in dream of the Reed.

Um, um, our dreamer sees, um, the tree, um, and that it adds and sweat and then sweet run off.

So we have this image of the tree bleeding on its right side, um, reflecting, um, the wound from the Spear of Longinus.

Um. Christ. And.

Bleeding trees. So yes, echoing the wings of Christ, but again, also giving us an image that has these connotations of apocalypse, of Judgement Day.

And this is turning back to Christ three again to explain it.

So bleeding trees can be an image of the apocalypse.

Um, the Christi post three saying that we are spam monarch blue the term be running under Kingdom creator and teacher sap.

We have to swath. So again, evoking the wounds of Christ, but potentially being read by its audience as some apocalyptic imagery.

Um, so again, this is playing around within the poem about these kind of questions of temporality.

When is the dreamer? When is their dream happening? Um, how are they supposed to to understand and interpret it?

So we're moving through the life of the cross in the poem, through the life of Christ, but also through the life of the world.

Um, and this, this shift in the, you know, this shifting, complex imagery in the cross,

in the poem and in the visual and spiritual culture of early medieval England,

you have this, this sort of sense of kind of slippage between material and spiritual, um, between the present and between other times.

Um, crosses are really polyvalent objects. And we get another example of ways of thinking about the cross in quite complicated ways.

In one of the riddles from the Exeter Book.

So I'm not going to talk about this text in detail because I don't really got time.

But it's on your handout and you can sort of think about it at length later.

So this is quite a complicated little riddle. And one of the suggested solutions to it is the word bam.

Because Bama's word, as we know from Jim, the root is um.

A tree. It's a beam of wood. It's a beam of light.

It's also a cross. And that potentially accounts for this very slippery speaking object in the riddle.

And we call speaking objects praise of a pair. So it's a device that's obviously really, really common in the book.

Riddles. Loads of them are first person I am this. I'm saying what it has to say, what I'm called.

But it's also, of course, what we get in dream of the root when the cross speaks to us directly.

So this little riddle is potentially giving us an image of a cross throughout its life, or Bam, throughout its life as a tree,

and then a a beam or a fire, and then a sort of wooden object, potentially a cross being passed around.

And then a kind of great cross at the end that the people, uh, being devoted to.

So the dream of the rood, with its interesting sort of first person speaking objects,

is very much part of this kind of big cultural tradition of speaking objects.

Let me see. In the expert riddles we see on lots of surviving bits of material culture.

You can have a look at the Alfred Jewel in the Ashmolean Museum, which said it says on its Alfred you welcome.

Alfred commanded me to be made. We also have lots of little, little bits of jewellery that have little things on.

One of my favourites is we have a little ring and it has a little written inscription inside,

and the little runic inscription says I am ring, which is great.

I just enjoy speaking objects. So it's not always of great spiritual significance, but clearly in dream of the read.

Um, it is. So that's sort of thinking a lot about the cross.

So now it's probably time to think about the way that the poem portrays Christ and various contract contexts for that.

So what's obviously quite distinctive when you first read dream of the read, actually, if you've been reading gospel accounts of the crucifixion,

is that we get this very martial, very heroic, very active portrayal of Christ and all of the suffering,

all of the passivity is transferred onto the cross.

And sometimes you see in an older criticism or in questionable websites, or you hear people saying that this is all about, you know,

producing a version of Christ that appeals to these Northern Germanic people who like heroism and like violence and for whom,

you know, turning the other cheek and blessed are the meek was just not going to cut it.

And it's very, very true that, um, what we know of pre-Christian, um, Northern Germanic cultures,

uh, that they are heroic and that heroic Christ might well be appealing for that reason.

But it's important to remember that this is something that we find across the Christian world.

So I'm back to Ravenna again with this sixth century, um, mosaic of Christ and the beast.

And you can see that he's wearing, um, his kind of late antique military garb.

Um, he's got his cross raised, um, like a, like a weapon or a battle standard.

So this is a very sort of, um, military. Christ, he's squatting, um, a lion and an asp at the bottom there.

So this heroic Christ is something that's very widely spread idea.

And we do see that in at the root, of course, we have this image of Christ as the young harlot,

um, the young hero who actively, um, climbs onto the cross and sets out to, to liberate mankind.

And as the the great scholar raised me Wolf.

Um, he was at Somerville. So those views at Somerville.

Um, you are following in Rosemary Wolf's impressive footsteps.

Rosemary Wolf, um, has a very important article on Jamie The Reach, which is on your reading list.

And usually your teachers will tell you not to read old criticism.

You know, we plead and beg you to please read stuff that's written in the last kind of,

you know, 15 years or so and try and be up to date with the field. But there are some seminal articles that are worth going back to.

And Rosemary Wolf's is one of them. And she talks about how the dream of the kind of remarkable achievement is the way that it balances, um,

triumph and suffering and the kind of paradoxical fusion of those and the crucifixion that's created by

the alternation between this radiant cross and the plain blood covered cross in the midst in the prelude.

And then secondly, and much more subtly and powerfully by the two figures of the heroic, virtuous warrior on the passive, enduring cross.

So it's really important for us to remember when we're dealing with Old English poetry and we're dealing with, uh,

heroic Christs and our martial saints, um, that we, you know, this is something that happens across the Christian world.

Um, you know, people historically got very excited about, um, pre-Christian religions.

That's very good. Eric Stanley, um, back on the hunt for Anglo-Saxon paganism, basically,

it's very hard to find because there isn't really any because all the literature is very Christian.

So we have to kind of step back from that and say that. Yes. Um, early medieval English Christianity is syncretic.

It has absorbed things from folk beliefs, from pre-Christian traditions.

But also our poems are produced by and for an elite, and that cultural elite is extremely Christian.

So we do have Gregory the Great writing about new sprinkling holy water on pre-Christian shrines.

But it's also important to remember that that's Gregory, writing from Italy.

So we shouldn't see anything distinctly English about that repurposing.

And as this Ravenna image shows, um, even in the late antique periods,

you've got these kind of classical and late antique martial ideas being adopted by the church.

So when we get our sort of heroic Christ and our martial saints in Old English, um, what we're getting is poets leaning,

albeit with local tastes and local vocabulary and local kind of cultural

conventions into very established models that are widespread across the church.

And Rosemary's other really key idea that she raises in her article is about the nature of Christ and the theology of the poem.

And this is quite a complex thing to to work through.

But basically she's pointing out, um, that.

This is a poet who's producing something that's potentially very theologically significant.

So yes, you can dream, read, dream of the read as presenting the crucifixion in a way that is broadly culturally appealing, with, um,

suffering cross explaining why suffering is valuable, heroic Marshal Christ demonstrating, um, Christianity as salvation for mankind.

But you could also read it as engaging with relatively contemporary theological debates about what Christ is,

how Christ works, and one of the key debates the early church works through is.

What is the nature of Christ? What is Christ's will? Is Christ human, or is Christ divine, or is Christ both human and divine?

And the answer you end up with is this.

The idea of hyperspace is that Christ has two natures, human and divine, and they are united in the one person that becomes the Orthodox view.

And what Wolf argues is that you can read dream of the readers engaging with this,

that in sort of separating Christ out between the cross and Christ, but also uniting them back together again.

The poet is playing around with these very, sort of current, very intellectual theological debates.

So yes, it's a poem that appeals to a broad audience, but it's also a poem that appeals to a very,

very intellectually sophisticated audience in its treatment of suffering and heroism.

So it's operating on multiple levels. And you can see other examples of thinking about Christ in two ways across the corpus.

This is, um, an 11th century crozier, and you can see on one side we have the suffering Christ,

but on the other side, like that Ravenna mosaic, we've got Christ triumphant and trampling on the beasts.

So that in some ways is the genius of of the root. It's a poem that uses suffering and heroism to think about, um, Christ on multiple levels.

So I want now to turn to thinking about the end dream of the route,

which is often the bit that people don't want to get for the commentary, because it's the least sort of ornamented part of the poem.

It's the poem that describes heaven, which of course we can't understand because we are on earth.

As these two images of the Ascension show the classic disappearing Christ there.

I'm from the Winchester School in the Tiberius Psalter and the Harrowing of [INAUDIBLE],

which is a narrative which is extra biblical but extremely widely known in early medieval Europe.

So, as I said, the idea of the harrowing is of Christ breaking open how and rescuing the souls of

the virtuous patriarchs who've been waiting there until he's able to rescue them.

And so we get a sort of allusive reference to it in The poem of the sea, your fast, the victory fast sun.

And we get more details of the harrowing in the prose corpus, for example.

And I've put it this on the handout, there's a an apocryphal homily based on the vision of Nicodemus,

which talks very explicitly about Christ coming and breaking open [INAUDIBLE].

So this is a very widely known idea that the poet engages with.

And so we get this switch from sort of confusion to homily to very preaching and to the poem about how we should respond to division.

Um, and about Judgement Day and the hiring of [INAUDIBLE].

So one of the questions that that stylistic change might make us ask is.

Are we dealing with one poet or two?

Because as I was saying, when we look at the cross, it's only quoting from the earlier part of the poem.

It's only quoting the speaking cross. There's been lots of debate about the ending.

Um, and sometimes people have been extremely harsh on the ending, for example, as way back in 1905.

Um describes the ending as um.

Very bad, basically. And he said that we conclude that it was either come here by accident or that the poet's judgement was at fault.

Now it's very important to avoid value judgements in your work.

Um, so please don't write in that style.

Um, but it's worth thinking about what has kind of triggered that statement from Kirk.

And obviously the poem does have an effect of unity is really good to have a very confusing,

very complex beginning and then a very clear, um, statement of how you're supposed to respond to that at the end.

And obviously, that means also that dreamer wakes up when you have a frame. But potentially there is something going on with this ending.

And say more recently, Leonard Knight authors looked at it in terms of its language and metre,

and has suggested quite persuasively that it seems to be rather later than the rest of the text.

Um. But what he also points out is that this is not sort of just chucking something on the end, that if this is a second poet,

they're reusing lines from earlier in the poem that constructing all these very careful envelopes and repetitions.

So what they're doing is. A pre apprehending and probably admiring the language and content of the earlier poet.

So maybe it's a later ending, but it's a thoughtful addition.

Why do we have it? Who knows? Maybe we just had the vision with no frame.

Maybe. There was a copy that was missing the ending, and this was created to patch that gap.

We have other examples of patches and additions to Old English poetry, where they're clearly dealing with a defective manuscript.

So. Don't dismiss the ending.

It is integral to the poem as we have it in the book. It's doing useful literary work,

but also don't use that Homer letter ending to read dream of the read as a poem that's clearly directed at a bunch of very recently converted people.

Because potentially this is an ending that's coming from a point when everybody has been Christian for about 300 years.

But I do think it's really intriguing to think about this potential for there being two poets,

because it means that the dream of the root is then a poem that embeds its own reception history within it.

We can see how somebody read dream of the rood in the ending of dream three.

What are you supposed to do with this amazing, dazzling, confusing, polyvalent vision of the cross?

And I wanted to end with that idea of reception, because, of course,

one of the things that you can do for this paper is write about the reception of these early medieval texts.

And so for my final slide, I'd just like to show you two, um, 20th century artists engaging with Dream of Three.

So on the left here is poet and artist David Jones,

who engages with dream of the rood and thinks about it visually and textually in his poem um, Another Martyr from 1952.

And here on the right is, is Lawrence Wisner, who's a famous glass engraver.

Those of you who are at Balliol, there's some bits of Whistler glass, um, in Balliol that you can potentially go and see.

He scratched some things on some windows in the old school.

Uh, anyway, as this is a beautiful memorial window that he created in Dorset, um, based, as you can see on dream of the Reed.

They're trying to capture the plain bleeding, suffering cross.

And also that amazing, ornamented and dazzling cross on that side there.

So with that beautiful image, that vision of the cross, I will leave the dream of the rood for this week and next week we are onto Beowulf.

Exciting stuff.

