[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
and then a taste of Old English before my lovely colleagues Sean and Laura tell you a bit more about,

um, different aspects of this, the literature of this period.

So. There's always a big delay on the slide.

So this is a really long period of literary history that you're going to be working with.

That starts roughly circa 650 and earlier with the beginnings of literacy in Old English,

and then takes us all the way through to centuries of linguistic and cultural change all the way to 1350.

And beyond. Because also for this paper you can write on reception history.

So you can look at post-medieval works that engage with the early medieval period.

This is what the exam looks like. Let's. Let's get to the serious of quickly.

Um, so for this paper, it's a three hour exam,

and you're asked to do one commentary on one of the set texts and then write two essays on anything, um, within the period.

And the full description of this is in the Premiums Handbook, which I hope you have all been diligently reading.

And there's also lots of material available for you, um, on also and up on canvas.

Um, for each of the lectures. The commentary texts.

There are sort of two options for the commentary. You can do early Middle English or you can do Old English.

I suspect that most of you will be doing the Old English set texts,

which are the battle mode and the wonder of the route, and an extract from Beowulf.

But there's also early Middle English out a nightingale.

Have a look and and Colonel Whisper, but you'll be working with your college tutors on the commentary material.

This is also a really linguistically diverse period.

So as well as material that is written in English,

which of course moves through phrases from Old English through Late Old English, Early Middle English, Middle English.

There are loads of other literary languages in the British Isles, and it's kind of neighbourhood that you can look at as well.

So material in Latin, which is obviously the kind of lingua franca of European intellectual culture in this period.

There's also French material material in Welsh and Irish, Old Norse material which Sean's going to talk to you about in a moment,

and also material in Cornish and Gallic and Hebrew and all kinds of languages that

have been used within the British Isles and then also beyond the British Isles.

You can think a little bit about what's happening elsewhere, um, in Europe and North Africa.

So I'm going to give you a taste of Old English literature. And obviously that's taste in a metaphorical sense.

All of the manuscripts are over a thousand years old. Please don't mix them up.

Librarians really don't like it if you do that. So what I thought I'd do quickly is to share some examples of some texts with you.

Beyond the set texts to reinstate and give you a brief sense of the kind of diversity of material that's available in Old English,

and also to show you some pretty pictures. Now that the slide show is cooperating.

So I'd give you a kind of a little kind of bit of old English to ruminate on.

And, um. Tasting, ruminating.

It's not a brilliant pun, but it's a very old one. And here's an example in Old English of somebody playing around with the same idea.

So I'm just going to quickly read you the old English so you can get a sense of how it sounds.

My word. Trust me that it should be heard that each doctor would, and that they were well aware of.

Yet so often this true understanding, special style yesterday was sweeter than heat.

I'm, well, swell. So this is a little poetic riddle,

which is part of a collection of nearly 100 riddles that survives in a really important manuscript of Old English poetry called the Exeter Book.

And it also contains one of your set texts, The Wanderer.

The book doesn't generally give us solutions to the riddles, so we're still arguing a bit about what some of them actually mean.

But this one, um, isn't really a riddle in the technical sense, because it actually tells us what it's about at the beginning with that word moth.

Moth. So this is a little riddle that explores the idea of the bookworm,

the little destructive creature that, um, consumes medieval manuscripts and leaves little holes behind.

And instead of sort of giving us a puzzle,

it's just familiarising something familiar and making you look in a new way at something that's part of your everyday experience.

Um,

and it's kind of enjoying the idea that although the little worm is literally kind of ruminating on the text because it's eating it and digesting it,

it doesn't gain any wisdom from that rumination.

Unlike you, the reader, who can and should.

So that's just a brief example of Old English poetry.

Um, but it's not just in manuscripts that Old English survives to us.

This is an incredibly famous object, the Franks Casket, which you can go and see in, um, the British Museum.

We've got a replica of it in the library.

And this is an ivory casket with lots of narrative visual storytelling, but also around the outside of this front panel.

We have another little riddle that tells us about the box with the fish floor to.

Unfair. And then it gives us the answer.

Running up beside their prawns. Barn whales buying.

So it allows you to kind of meditate on the creature whose material remains are forming the body of the casting.

But we can see here that what we've got is a different alphabet. This is the runic alphabet.

So we see the Latin alphabet being adapted and used in manuscripts for texts.

And that's what you'll get in your mix on Robinson. But we also sometimes see runes, um, the earlier alphabet carved on objects.

And we got, um, lots of kind of ivory materials.

Surviving from early medieval England. From the prequel period.

Um, but we also get lots of interest in Wales,

and I'm going to stretch the definition of whale a little bit and just talk about marine mammals

more generally and show you a little bit of prose from a text called Octoroon Will stand,

because you're commentary texts are all poetry, but there's a really diverse prose corpus in Old English as well.

So Octoroon Will stand is some travel accounts that were told, we're told, to King Alfred's in late ninth century Wessex,

and in one of them Otter describes sailing really far north all the way around to the Kola Peninsula in what's now Russia.

Um, looking for walruses. Um, it's kind of trading accounts.

So I'm justifying this as a whale because the old English for Woolworths is horse wild.

So you know horse well. So you've got some nice old English wood, and we have lots of wool recived that survives, like this brilliant pen case.

Um, here's a marvellous old ivory crozier from the 11th century, with Christ armed with a cross, kind of triumphing over sin.

But you can also see how there's all these kind of animal heads tucked away in the shapes in the corner.

And we see this also on one of the most famous objects that survives from early medieval England,

that you can go and see in the Ashmolean Museum, the Alfred, George, the tiny, tiny, exquisite thing.

And it's an it's a manuscript pointer. So originally from out of the snout of the beast,

which I hope you can see with its eye and its mouth would have been ivory or wood that would have helped you to read the manuscript.

But again, it's. Got writing on it like the Franks Casket.

This is an object that talks to us about itself and where it comes from.

Alfred Hecht. We are coming. Alfred commanded me to be made.

And Sean is now going to come and talk to you about Old Norse, but just as a link between the two and thinking back to to the traveller.

Um, he voyaged in northern Norway and came to Alfred's court.

We have another arsenal. Not quite as fancy as the Alfred.

You. This is the Borg Arsenal, and it was found right up in Borg in the far north of Norway.

So we have little bits of material culture that are supporting the accounts that we get in the literary texts,

and also really emphasising how connected, um, Britain is to the continent, to Scandinavia, to Iceland and beyond.

He's picking up my voice. And okay, so as Helen has said,

the British Isles in the early medieval period was a multilingual society and one of the languages spoken was Old Norse,

and Old Norse is unlike the other languages spoken in the Middle Ages in the British Isles, in two important ways.

So first of all, it's closely related to Old English.

So they're both Northwest Germanic languages,

and it's been argued that they were mutually comprehensible during this period in the way that Danish, Swedish and Norwegian are today.

And secondly, Old Norse was never written down in the British Isles.

It was written down elsewhere later in medieval Scandinavia and Iceland.

But it was never written down in the British Isles, so it was only ever an oral language.

And that means that it can be difficult to sort of really work, have exactly what its impact on Old English literature was.

Now speakers of, uh. Speakers of old speakers of Old English and Old Norse were in contact throughout the early Middle Ages,

but this contact was most intense during the Viking Age,

and the Viking Age conventionally begins in seven seven, nine three with the raid on Lindisfarne,

which you can see commemorated on this stone, and it ends in 1066 with the Battle of Stamford Bridge.

And within that time frame there were a few key dates to remember.

So 1870, the martyrdom of King Edmund of East Anglia at the hands of the Vikings, and our Fritsch,

a late 10th century Anglo-Saxon monk, describes him as stuck full of arrows like the bristles of a hedgehog.

You can see that on this image. Uh, and then.

991 The Battle of Malden.

This was a great Viking defeat of the English, in which the earldom and business died,

and the Old English poem written to commemorate this is one of your set texts.

You can see its early modern manuscript on the left hand side of the slide.

And 1002, the Saint Brice's Day Massacre, which king when King Ethelred the Unready ordered all the Danes in England to be killed.

And this slide shows a mass grave on the site of Kendrew Kendrew Court in Saint John's College,

in which the skeletons of 36 men were found who had recently arrived from Denmark, so they were probably victims of the massacre.

And then finally in 1014, at 1016, we've got two Danish kings of England, Sweden, Falk Beard and then the great.

And you can see him here with his hand on the cross, that of proclaiming himself as a Christian king.

So in the early 11th century, England was part of an Anglo Scandinavian empire in which Old Norse was a high status language,

the language spoken by the king and aristocracy.

But this followed years of Scandinavian settlement in England, in which Old Norse and Old English was spoken side by side.

But even if you put the Viking Age aside, the British Isles in the early Middle Ages was part of a North Sea cultural zone.

And this upside down map from Season Houses book, the Emergence of English,

gives a good sense of how the North Sea and the various rivers running into it

created connections between the British Isles and what are now southern Scandinavia,

northern Germany and the Netherlands.

So within this area, this area, we have raiding tree, but we also have trading the circulation of goods and of people.

And above all of stories. And if the standard version of the settlement of Anglo-Saxon England is correct,

then at least some of the settlers came from or via southern Scandinavia.

Uh, incidentally, the the red dots that you can see on this map are not the sites of Viking settlements.

They're the location of Ikea stores. If you want to know why, you'll have to read the book and find out.

So in what ways did Old Norse influence Old English? Well, first of all, place names.

So there are lots of Old Norse place names in England, especially in areas of Viking settlement.

My daughter had a primary school teacher called Mr. Thwaite.

Satta Thwaite is originally a place name. It's an Old Norse compound word meaning summer dairy in a clearing.

And if you've ever been to York, you'll know that many of the streets that have Norse names like Michael Gate,

which means Main Street or High Street in Old Norse.

Secondly. Loanwords. Now, there aren't many Old Norse loanwords in Old English, but from 1100 on we find lots of them,

especially in northern dialects, so you'll come across them above all in your early, uh, early Middle English texts.

Words like fellow ugly window, knife, skirt, sky, law, and extraordinarily,

the third person plural pronouns they, them and they're a borrowed from Old Norse.

Now it's extremely rare for a language to borrow a pronoun from another language,

so that gives you a sense of how closely related Old English and Old Norse were.

Finally, we've got the visual arts.

So on this slide you can see two stone crosses from the late 10th century, one from Gosforth in Cumbria and one from the Isle of Man.

And the first one shows the Old Norse myth of Thor fishing for the middle earth serpent,

the myth that this is the serpent that encircles the world in Old Norse smith, and lies at the bottom of the outermost sea.

So Thor rose out to sea with a giant. You can see Thor on the left and the giant on the right here, and he casts out an ox's head as a bait,

and you can just see the jaws of the middle earth serpent opening around it at the bottom of the picture.

So this is a myth that was first written down in 13th century Iceland, but here is pictorial evidence of it in England three centuries earlier.

So that's quite remarkable. The other cross from the Isle of Man shows signature of Sigurd the Dragon Slayer roasting the dragon's heart over a fire,

and in the legend he burns his finger, puts it to his mouth, and tastes the dragon's blood,

and this gives him the magical ability to understand words.

So notice in this image that his ear is enlarged to show that he's listening.

On his left hand side there's a bird and behind him is his horse, granny.

Again, this story was first written down in 13th century Iceland, but even tiny details of it were known on the Isle of Man in the 10th century.

So you've got the same story circulating in Iceland, in Scandinavia and in the British Isles.

So what does this mean for your set texts? I'm going to give you two examples.

The first is from the Battle of Maldon,

and the passage up on the slide is the speech made by the Viking messenger to the leader of the English army business.

And it's been argued that this Viking messenger is speaking English with a Scandinavian accent,

which would make this the first literary use of dialect in English.

Say, for example, in line for business is addressed as ale.

In Old English, this just means man or warrior, but in the Old Norse cognate,

ya'll or earl refers to someone of high social standing, which is exactly what Bernal's is.

In line five, there's the adjective sneller, which in Old English means quick or active,

but in Old Norse the cognate word sneller means brave or eloquent, which again seems to work better here.

And in line eight there's the old English cunning goddess say spear rush, meaning battle.

This doesn't occur anywhere else in Old English poetry, but it does occur a lot in Old Norse poetry as Gale Rouse torrent of space.

And finally we've got this word grace, which is definitely a loanwords from Old Norse meaning truce or peace.

So all these things together suggest, although this Viking messenger is speaking Old English, he actually sounds like a Scandinavian.

That's not the whole story, though,

because there are a number of characters fighting for the English in the Battle of Malden who have Scandinavian names, say, for example,

Amphora and Marcus are fighting side by side, but Alfred is an Anglo Saxon name,

while Marcus is a Scandinavian name is the name Magnus, and both of them are described as brave and unafraid.

Among the men who flee from the battle are three men who are described as the sons of Order.

And it's been suggested, although it's not definite, that order is a Scandinavian name.

So I'm reading my son the Saga of Arrow, old at the moment.

Uh, and if alter is a Danish name, then perhaps these men are fleeing the battlefield not because they're cowards,

but because they don't want to fight against other Danes.

And finally, this is my favourite. We've got wisdom. He's described as the son of the storm.

And we need. Now, uh, the, uh, we Stan is, uh, probably open.

Yeah. Stayton Thurston is definitely old.

No stone statement tools. Stone. But Wheeling seems to be an Anglo-Saxon woman's name.

That would make her the only named woman in the poem.

So here we have an Anglo-Saxon woman married to a Scandinavian whose son has a Danish name,

but he fights and dies at the Battle of Malden, not on the Danish, but on the English side.

So that gives you a little glimpse into how complex ethnicity is in this poem.

So I'm going to end with Beowulf. So Beowulf, as I'm sure you know, is an English poem that is set in Scandinavia.

Beowulf comes from southern Sweden and has right to the hall of King Hrothgar is in Denmark.

So these images are a reconstruction of Harald on the site of Leiria in Denmark.

Other characters come from around the North Sea and the Baltic.

None of them come from England. And this shows you the kind of maps that you might find in an edition of the poem.

But it isn't how the old English poet and his audience would have imagined.

Scandinavia. This is a modern map. The audience and the poet would probably have imagined something a bit more like this.

And this is the Tiberius map,

which was made in England around the same time that the Beowulf manuscript was produced in Scandinavia and England are down in the left hand corner.

So if I zoom in, you should be able to see England, the Isle of Man, Ireland, the Orkneys and right in the corner Iceland, which is labelled to.

And then further up here, further up, you can see that the Danish peninsula and Scandinavia,

which is depicted as an island, but they're about as far on the periphery of the world as you can get.

And it's recently been argued that morality is what Beowulf is all about.

So Alfred Hiatt says the space Beowulf writes about is regional, a periphery without a centre,

whose overriding motifs are exile, mixture, loss, and survival.

And many of the stories that the poet tells are about exiles and outsiders.

This final example is from the end of your set text the court poet or show celebrates Beowulf victory over Grendel by telling the story of Samson.

And this is a story that was well known in medieval Scandinavia and Iceland, where Sigmund is called Sigmund.

But if you read the story of Sigmund in the saga of the Olsens, you'll find it's much darker.

In Old Norse segment, it is a descendant of the god Odin.

To avenge the death of his father in a feud. He sleeps with his sister Simone.

So that they can conceive a child who is fearless enough to take revenge, and this child is called Fittler in Old English and sin fitly.

You know Norse, Sigmund and sin actually live as outlaws in the forest.

They shapeshift as wolves and they plunder and kill throughout the surrounding area.

And sin dies when he drinks poison prepared for his father by his stepmother.

Really a dysfunctional family. So how much of this story does the old English poet know?

And what does it say about the heroic world to which Beowulf and see him and belong?

And on this slide, I've just pulled out some of the phrases that suggest that the old English poet

did know the dark and ambivalent stories circulating about Symonds in particular.

Notice that he describes cement as perpetrating feuds and crimes.

That's exactly the same wording that's used for Grendel attacks on Herod.

So this is an episode that calls into question the supposed distinction between the heroic and the monstrous.

Stories. Travel.

Beowulf may date to as early as the eighth century, while the Norse stories about Siegmund are preserved in one Icelandic manuscript from about 1400.

So that's 600 years and over a thousand miles between them.

It may seem astonishing in an age before the internet that stories could cross such distances, but they clearly did so.

While Old Norse isn't English literature exactly, it is certainly one of the literatures of early medieval England.

I'm going to pass it over now to Helen. Laura.

I'm going to try and do in the next 20 minutes or so is explain some of the massive cultural changes that happen over the course of this period.

Um, there are some serious turning points that come after the Norman conquest of 1066.

And the main point is that in comparison with that northern facing world that Sean and Helen were telling you about,

what happens now is that from the 12th century onwards, England is inexorably drawn south.

And you can see on this map here that from 1154,

when Henry the second of England married Eleanor of Aquitaine, almost all of France was under their control.

So all the pinky ready bits of this map were under the control of the King of England by virtue of marriage to his wife and his own inheritance.

So England becomes a completely different culture, with French as the main language spoken by the court,

by the aristocracy, and by anyone who wants to move up in the world.

Next major turning point in fast historical importance and the struggles of which we are still facing now, today.

The First Crusade, uh, this is preached by the Pope Urban the second in 1095.

And hundreds of thousands of men went across Europe, massacring Jewish people along the way,

made it to the Holy Land and against all the odds, conquered, um, Jerusalem.

And the accounts that they wrote of their conquests include the petrifying lines in the temple and porch of Solomon.

Men rode in blood up to their knees and bridal rains.

This was an absolutely horrific act of invasion and conquest, and established the Franks, so-called, um,

largely French knights in the East, established the so-called Kingdom of Jerusalem and inaugurated conflict which continues to this day.

Another major turning point to think about specific to England now, this point, um, and very much to do with England's inheritance,

the hybrid kingdom that was forged from the Norman acquisition of the Anglo-Saxon kingdom in 1215.

Magna Carta was drawn up, which was a statement of the rights of the kingdom, the Commonwealth and the nobility against the King, against tyranny.

Lex, Lestat, Rex. It was the statement the law will stand for, the king will fall.

And in support of this there was a culture, a mythical culture that in fact King John had been a tyrant and that he'd been poisoned to free the land.

But the thing to take away from this is that one of the most foundational values that became inherent to a kind of self-conscious,

multilingual English identity was the idea of strong and just kingship under the law,

which was very different from all other countries in Europe at the time, and indeed very different from the early modern idea of,

say, divine right of kings as England, medieval England, that developed the idea that kings should be under the law.

So some cultural transformations from before the conquest to after the conquest.

The first one is a dramatic change in the way that gold is envisaged.

So in the dream of the rood, one of your set texts, um, Christ is a conquering figure.

Um, the young Pallas, the young hero that was God Almighty, striding on stiff mode.

He's strong, he's powerful, he's brave, he's glorious.

Uh, mystical and speedy. Um. So he climbs on the cross.

And he conquers for all mankind and saves mankind.

And you can see that this, of course, is a new religion attempting to meld itself to the warrior culture that it's trying to overcome.

You know, so that to be Christian is not to be pathetic.

It's to be a warrior, the greatest warrior of all.

However, by the time we get to the 12th and 13th century ideas about Christ being completely transformed.

Um, you see here a very typical kind of illumination of the suffering, bleeding Christ on the cross.

And this is a middle English poem from the 13th century,

which imagines a conversation between Christ and Mary while he is on the cross, and she's weeping for his wounds.

Um, son, who may tell is when you say the bloody stream is.

And from the in have to to effect. Um. You know, how can I not cry?

I can see blood streaming down your body. So they say their body be swung in fate and home to throw stone.

And no wonder that may be well. Um. I can see that your body is being pierced and tortured.

And how can I not grieve? How can I not cry?

And cry? Says to Isolde that for Vanessa I die for your sake.

And in fact, in the rest of this poem, he goes on to say, it's good that I'm dying, because otherwise you would all go to [INAUDIBLE].

And so you can see that a completely different conception of the relation between man and God has come about,

that it's what we call affective piety, a kind of piety based on affect, on emotion, on feeling.

And Christians were encouraged to feel with Mary suffering, to feel with Christ's suffering.

And it's this that, of course, seeds into our culture the idea that suffering itself is noble and ennobling.

And, you know, that's an idea we're still wrestling with. Another cultural transformation that's dramatic.

What happens to the idea of the fighting man? We start out with the pagan warrior hero that you might recognise from Beowulf,

or indeed from Achilles in the Iliad to an idea of Christian sacrifice.

Um, you know how how can you commit violence without going to [INAUDIBLE] to the idea of the chivalric knight and ultimately a celebrated lord?

So Beowulf, um, which is, say, the to domas at dice.

Uh, the only thing that matters, the only thing you can do.

You're a warrior. There's no meaning to your life. You're fighting monsters.

You're keeping out the dark for as long as you can. All you can hope for is glory before death.

That's that's, you know, fashion. Who can glory before death?

That's the greatest thing you can hope for. There is nothing else. Because Beowulf is written by a Christian poet about a pagan past.

He glories in their warrior heroism, but at the same time he fears them that their lives are meaningless.

And this came to a head. The poem that Sean was showing you, the Battle of Malden.

So this was, of course, when England was Christian and the invading forces, the Danes, the Vikings against them, were heathen.

And you will surely, if you are defending your land against if you are a Christian,

defending your kingdom against heathen pagan invaders, surely that would be virtuous.

But no, they were not given that promise. In the Battle of Malden we have the figure of Britain, of the nobleman defending his country,

praying to God that he should be saved him from thee today, that he had showered him in the moat.

And I pray that devils not have my soul. The Hindu heroine has in Ashoka's um.

Then the pagans cut him down. So the poet can't promise.

The poet can't say, yes. You'll be fine.

And at this point, uh, really influential writers like, um, the monk Alfred Church were writing things, saying, yes, violence is sinful.

Violence is inherently sinful. Um, and so we cannot guarantee any souls safety, anyone who dies in violence.

And I think I've argued, um, in print, that this is a real ideological crisis for Danish society,

that suddenly you have a warrior society which has had its foundations cut out from

under it because it's been told that violence is a sin and there's no way past that.

What do you do? Well, what happened was England was conquered by the Danes anyway.

However the crusade happened,

the popes decided that it would be excellent to be able to command armies hence of the second proclaim the First Crusade and the Pope.

Actually that we get after the First Crusade is very different.

So this is a French poem, regarded as a French national epic, but the only surviving manuscript of it was written here in England.

And it's here in Oxford. It's known as the Oxford Roland.

But in this poem we have a Christian warrior fighting for the Franks, for Charlemagne, for his Christian king against Muslims, supposedly.

But when he dies, he gets to go to heaven.

He confesses his sins, he prays for God's pardon.

And then the angel Gabriel and the Cherubim and Saint Michael come and take the Count's soul to Paradise.

So now suddenly, we have a fighting man being told you can die in battle, but you can be saved.

And that was what the Crusades had promised. That's what the papacy had promised.

And that's how it got to command armies.

And this then, was an absolutely dramatic transformation in the whole ruling class of Europe's idea of themselves,

because for hundreds of years they basically been told, well, yes, you're the ruling class, but your very way of life is sinful.

You're probably all going to [INAUDIBLE]. And now suddenly this door opens.

That said, but if you're fighting for God, then you can be saved.

You can be as grand and glorious and warrior like and heroic as you like and still go to heaven.

And once that door has been opened, now we get the new world of chivalry and a celebration of the aristocratic way of life.

And this is just an excerpt from one of criteria or two of Christianity was Asturian romances.

So these are the archetypal romances of King Arthur and Lancelot and all of these compatriots and knights.

You go out on quests and win the lady and Arthur's court is a place of ceremony,

nobility, magnificence, wealth, gold, treasure, dinners, singing, dancing.

And this is all celebrated. And this literature emerges out of nowhere in the 12th century, celebrating the way of life of the aristocracy.

And over time when romance is stopped being written in English again.

So, as I said, of course, literature is written for the ruling classes.

So for a good century and a half it's all written in French.

But by the time you get to the 13th century, because English was everyone's first language, poetry springs into life in English as well.

And then you get English versions of the romance.

And here you can see a confluence of the chivalric knight, the hero, with the old idea of the warrior.

Uh, because in English romance, these knights don't just go out on quests and win the go, they actually conquer whole kingdoms.

With the English idea that I associated with Magna Carta of good laws and happiness and the good of the Commonwealth.

So one of the Middle English set texts is here. This is Havelock the Dane.

Um, it was a king B out of those that in his team who were good lovers, he did muck and and full.

Well, Holden, uh, there was a king in the olden days, and he made good laws then was England at ease?

Um. And I've put this contrast here between Beowulf and Havelock,

because you can see it's as though we've come full circle and the world is completely changed.

Because where is Beowulf as he's dying says?

I wish I could have given my war gear to my son if I had had a son.

I held this land for 50 winters, and he's going to die, and then his people are going to be scattered and everything will fall apart.

By comparison, Havelock rules England with great happiness for 60 winters and has 15 sons and daughters.

And all of the sons become kings.

So you can see that this whole utter change in the way that the warrior is conceived, in the way that the King is conceived,

this new hopefulness associated with assertion of identity, an assertion of virtue, an assertion of law.

Next cultural transformation, interiority and selfhood.

So before the conquest in the 10th 11th centuries, as I said, there was a real worry,

which was that probably everything that you had to do in your normal life would send you to [INAUDIBLE].

Uh, here, for example, we're told the translation is on the handout.

Um, you know, if you kill someone, justifiably, I suppose that you're a fighting man.

You're defending your Lord's land, and you kill someone.

Well, then you have to fast on bread and water for seven years, and you have to bewail your sin every day.

And you have to hate your sin and mourn for your sin. Um, and you need to do whatever other penance your priest tells you.

And there's no promise here that actually, that's going to work.

Um, Alfred says, you know, baptism cleanses.

You have all sin when you're born, but you can't be baptised a second time in a month.

In fact, you ought to come and be baptised again. So all you can do is lament your sin and do penance for it, and really hate evil and not sin again.

But at the same time, Alfred is telling fighting men that everything they do is sinful.

So this is a really panicky situation.

I think people suffered this ultimate dissonance that the way they had to live, they were told, was going to destroy their souls.

Um, and there was no attempt to look inside people's minds.

Um, there's a quote here from a theologian of the 12th century.

You know, we ask for penance, we ask for fasting and so on. But that's all we can know.

There is no other way of knowing whether he's a true penitent. You know, we can't look inside the mind.

Only God can.

But everything changed in the 12th century, when the very famous philosopher theologian Abelard started thinking about where sin actually occurs,

and what Abelard said was that sin happens when we consent to what is unlawful.

Nick. Quark, we read, triumphs when we no way draw back.

He says it's the moment when the mind consents to sin that we sin, and actually acting on it adds nothing.

And so he explained this by saying, supposing that there is a man who's desperate to kill me, he wants to kill me.

If he could, he would kill me. But as it happens, he's tied up.

Well, he's still a murderer because his soul is consenting to sin.

And if someone then releases him and he does kill me, that changes nothing except for me.

So this transformation, this said now sin isn't just an action that you pay back for with another action of penance.

Sin happens in the mind, in the soul, in the head. That changed everything.

And so now you have a culture of confession where what Christians were told was that you need to open your soul,

open your heart, speak the truth of yourself to God.

Now, the producer is another of the Middle English set texts, and this is an astonishing work of guidance,

written to three sisters who had walled themselves up as hermits, praying to God every day.

And this text tells them how to confess. Shrift shall be rifle bitten.

It's all right. I'll knock it off the market. Careful admonition, grateful and hopeful.

We source and witness. Honour and steward. Invest. They sorted before longer.

All of these things. Confession must be, as I say, the translations on the handout.

But they're also told. Don't lie about confession.

A series, she says. The woman. Uh, I've had a lover or it haven't been full of myself.

And I've made an idiot of myself. That's is not naked shrift.

Uh, be glued to it, not do away to toe touches. Um, don't make stuff up on reading.

Say, see or go to Sara. I'm a fool. Stood me out a stinking daughter.

I'm a foul stud mare, a stinking [INAUDIBLE]. Give your sin a foul name and call it foul.

So it's about fully leading into what it means in the head to be a sinner.

And this leads to a whole new way of thinking about interiority.

Richard Rollo, towards the end of our period in the 1330s, he says, you know, no one can tell me if I love God.

You know, I could I could stay awake all night. I could pray all night, I could fast, I could be on my knees for hours.

But anyone can do that. The only way no one can tell me if I love God.

For they may not see for anything they could see me do.

Love is in the will, verily not in work, but a sign of love.

So it establishes a completely different psychology.

You must know yourself. Above all, you must look inside yourself.

But what the church didn't anticipate when it set up this structure of look into your self.

Think about your psychology. Think about your relationship with God. Was that that psychology would also spill over into other spheres?

So my next cultural transformation fiction and the love plot.

So in 1155 ways is translating a pseudo history about King Arthur.

And he inserts a brand new speech where he suddenly says, no, no, no, peace time is good as well as war.

Because for me, French values chivalry.

It's for love and for lovers that knights do knightly things.

Um, and this comes out of nowhere, and this seems uncontroversial to us,

because we use now to the idea of the author in romance, where our knight wins his lady.

But it came out of nowhere. It's completely irrational to say that knights do things for love.

Achilles did nothing for love. Beowulf did nothing for love. Aeneas had to stop loving Dido so he could go and found Rome.

Love was a distraction. Love was not the goal of life.

Love was a thing that might stop you as a warrior from doing what you're supposed to do.

And then suddenly, in the 12th century, it all turns around.

And love is now supposedly the goal of knightly action. And so it gets idealised.

Um, and again, in another kind of meshing together of ideas, how is love justified as a great virtue?

Well, because you suffer so much for it. So it absorbs the Christian paradigm that suffering is itself ennobling.

And then you talk about the suffering of love and suddenly become a suffering noble lover.

And that makes you the hero. But we can see that this is really a model that's just advertising how great the aristocracy life is to themselves.

Because really, once you get the girl, you guys, everything,

she gave him her love and her body and she gave him a gift that however lavishly he gave or spent, she would find enough for him more.

He spends more gold and silver he has.

And then when he's accused of, um, insulting the Queen, his lady comes to defend him because he said his lady is much more beautiful than the Queen.

So she comes to defend him, and she comes into the court and takes her clothes off.

And everyone agrees. Yes, she is more beautiful than the Queen. Um, and so Lavelle has one.

Um, but this genre therefore also became a bit of a joke because it's about the best lady, the best knight wins the best lady in any given romance.

He is our best knight. His our best lady. So, Marie de France, he you can read and write about, um, she has a moment.

A kind of periodic romance where four knights love a lady.

But no one can tell the difference between them. They're all equally good.

So she can't decide either. Um. And it ends badly.

They they all die in the end.

Um, but what this means, then, is that if the romance set itself off as a meritocracy, the best knight wins the best lady.

It also opened itself up to the Christian critique once again, because if you're supposed to love the best knight, then who should you love?

But Christ, no one is better than Christ. And so in the unpronounceable set text, we have a story.

We have a an allegory, a lady in a castle.

The lady is the soul. The castle is the body. She's beset with enemies.

This is the devil. This is sin. And this knight comes to rescue her and she disdains him.

And he says, then, well, what are you thinking? Your love is either to be given away or it's to be sold, or it's to be taken from you with force.

If you're going to give you love away, then who would you give it to? Except me.

Now me thing is fairest. Am I not the fairest? Am I not the richest king?

Am I not the most courteous? Am I not the wisest, etc. and he says, if you want to sell your love, you have a bullet here with love over Allah.

Ultra, I have bought your love with the greatest love that there is.

Which is to say that Christ died for her, for his soul.

So if you want to sell your love, sell it for love, sell it for this greatest love.

And then he says, well, if you don't want to give me your love or sell me your love,

then I stand here with a cruel sword over your head to divide life and soul and send them both into the fire of [INAUDIBLE].

To be near the devil's hole. Shamefully and sorrowfully world.

Put an end for the end of time till the end of time.

Probably. That, of course, is that implies that love can be imposed or impelled.

And that's a real problem. It's a philosophical, psychological, theological problem.

If God is the only person you should love, then how can you feel that you are a free individual if you love them, if you love God?

And so I have a tiny coda with a minute to go, which is that there is one text written in the 12th century,

which is one of those that stands above all the other things around it.

Um, and in that text alone, love is written about as love of one other mortal person.

It brings a great deal of pain and suffering, but that is not ennobling.

What's the point of sustaining a lot of things, Tristan in Thomas of Britain's Tristan.

Um. I've had so much suffering. I want to stop loving her.

So hoping that he can stop loving you. Zeus.

He marries another beautiful woman. Cool dessert.

But if the first dessert had never been, he would never love the other one.

Because he so loved. Is he long to love this news?

But if he could have had the Queen, he would not have loved his earth maiden until catalogued as tangible.

Each of them suffered anguish and sorrow, one and all. They live with sadness.

I do not know which of the four, I should say, experience the greatest anguish.

Thomas describes how there is a king who loves his queen, and she cannot love him.

How there is a queen who hates her husband but must submit to him and cannot have the man she loves.

How there is Tristan, who cannot have the woman he loves and is married to a woman he does not love and cannot touch.

And how there is a woman who is married to Tristan, who loves and adores him, but he will not touch her, and she does not want to beg.

And in that, Thomas manages to give us the idea that love might be even irreplaceable.

Other not because they are the best, but because they are themselves.

And to give us the idea of the plurality of humanity and the debts we owe to other people and the conflicts that we cannot resolve,

um, and to give us an idea of human tragedy and the tragedy of mortality.

And so that's my favourite text from the 12th century.

And thank you very much for listening. Oh, yeah.

