[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
Um, goodness, this is quite loud. It will take a bit of getting used to.

And thank you very much for coming, um, at 9:00 on Tuesday of week two.

Um, so my name is is Joshi Gupta. Um, if you don't know me already, I'm based at Pembroke.

Um, please feel free to drop me an email if you have any questions about the things that I talk about in this lecture.

So as I say in this lecture, I'm actually going to be just talking about a single novel published in 1864.

It's called Raj Man's Wife by Kim Chandra Chattopadhyay.

Um, some of you might have heard me mention it, uh, in the taster lecture for Prelims Paper three last week.

We think it is the first Indian novel written in the English language.

Um, I hope that by looking at it patiently, we might not only figure out how it's working,

but also to see how it opens up a huge range of questions about language, about 19th century imperialism, about the form of the novel itself.

So kind of by staying small, I hope that we can actually, um, think about some quite, quite kind of big questions.

Hopefully it gives you a model, um, for any kinds of work you're doing with 19th century fiction.

So before introducing you to Raj Man's wife, I'm going to zoom out and cover some of the basics of Indian history in the 18th and 19th centuries.

Um, just so that we can situate him in a number of different contexts.

So in other words, before we move on, we have to go quite a long way back.

So this is a painting by William Daniel,

which sparked my curiosity as soon as I saw it hanging in the Victoria memorial in Kolkata, um, a few years ago.

Uh, forgive the quality of the photo, which is taken on my on my phone.

Um, it was completed in 1802.

So during the romantic period, 60 years before the publication of Raj Man's Wife, and it was exhibited at the Royal Academy in London.

In the same year, William Daniel travelled to India with his uncle,

the architectural engraver Thomas Daniel, and together they set about capturing what they thought they saw.

So I found this painting strange, um, when I encountered it, and I wanted to interrogate my own immediate, kind of almost visceral response.

What was curious, even kind of off about it.

And so now look at these paintings and things might start to become clear.

It turns out that I was experiencing déja vu. So this is Turner's Fishermen at Sea, 1796.

And Joseph Turner's Mediterranean Night, 1753.

The Daniels were using a set European aesthetic frameworks and categories to filter

non-European space landscapes and territories in the process of being colonised.

Um, through William Daniels filter this coastline.

Sorry. Let me go back to the the first slide. Um, this coastline in Tamil Nadu is picturesque or sublime.

Um, Edmund Burke tells us that, um, whatever is fitted in any sort to excite the ideas of pain and danger, that is to say,

whatever is in any sort terrible, or is conversant about terrible objects or operates in a manner analogous to terror, um, is a source of the sublime.

That is, it is productive of the strongest emotion which the mind is capable of feeling, the passion caused by the great and the sublime in nature.

When those causes operate most powerfully is astonishment,

and astonishment is that state of the soul in which all its motions are suspended with some degree of horror.

And I should have said at the start, the handout for this lecture is on canvas.

It just has the quotes on it. Um, so feel free to have that up alongside you or to download it after.

Um, so anyway, that's Edmund Burke on the sublime,

the visual vocabularies of 18th century Europe of the Royal Academy of Framing Tamilnadu, rendering it comprehensible to the British I.

The critic Hermione de Almeida tells us a little bit more about Thomas and William Daniel.

Because of the military successes of Cornwallis and the greater security provided by the new presence of large number of numbers of British troops.

Daniel and his nephew would be the first of the artist travellers to India to be able to journey through all three company presidencies Calcutta,

Madras and Bombay. Um, any history of modern British imperialism has to start with the presidency and the East India Company,

which was set up to trade with the, um, uh, to trade around the Indian Ocean in the 1600s.

Establishing links with the Mughal Empire, in particular, um, places like um, as was then Calcutta.

Uh, now Calcutta grew as they were increasingly significant ports.

The company's aims slowly moved from trade and imperial from trade itself to imperial conquest,

in part because it was competing with the Portuguese, the Dutch and the French.

It became stealthily but surely militarised in the second half of the 1700s,

and the Daniels de Almeida tells us, could wander around three presidencies with all of their stuff.

Um, you can imagine the kind of kit required to be an artist in that period.

Um, so they could travel around, um, undisturbed by rival powers.

Presidencies where? Areas of British administrative control.

Um, for our purposes today, it's, um, especially important to think about the Bengal Presidency.

The Battle of Plassey in 1757. And the role of General George Cornwallis, General Charles Cornwallis.

In 1757, the East India Company's forces defeated the Nawab of Bengal at Balochi.

So Plassey, who was working with the French. This victory meant that the British were able to claim or annexe Bengal.

And most historians see this as a major turning point, um, the point from which British rule started to become secure.

General Cornwallis was the governor of the Bengal Presidency from the 1780s, and was instrumental in extending and sustaining this control.

If you want to think about a literary description of these battles, um, try Wilkie Collins's The Moonstone.

Um, you might have that assigned for you a paper three um, uh, tutorial work that begins,

uh, with the 1799 siege of Saranga partum in the Kingdom of Mysore.

Um, I would say that the moonstone actually is probably the most sophisticated canonical Victorian novel about empire.

Um, so if you're interested in this longer history, do start there. So remember that all of this is happening before the start of our period.

That we're covering for paper three the 19th century. So fast forward now to 1857.

By this point, Calcutta, the capital of the Bengal Presidency, was the cosmopolitan centre of British India.

Elsewhere, though, discontent was stirring, and in 1857,

Indian soldiers working under and for the East India Company began a violent rebellion which quickly spread to other territories.

And the British at home were kind of spectacularly horrified by the violence.

So a violence, which of course, went very much in both directions.

The East India Company ultimately regained control, but this was a key moment because the Crown decided to take over.

So off to the rebellions. The East India Company was no longer a proxy for the Crown.

Company rule ended. The British Raj was born with Queen Victoria nominally at the helm.

So power shifts from this kind of company, a private sort of entity, to to the Crown itself.

So I'm just going to anchor this whistlestop broad historical narrative and a very particular individual experience, um, that of.

Uh, Dickens son, um, Walter Savage Landau, who I mentioned in my taster lecture last week.

Angela Burdette Coots, the wealthy philanthropist and friend of Dickens,

set Walter up with the East India Companies army and he was soon getting ready to travel to Calcutta.

So these letters from Dickens tell us what happened.

Between the outfitter and the Hindustani and the India House and the passage preparations I thought I described,

I described that he was getting dazed. I left the poor fellow on board the Indus yesterday.

Um, so that's a ship? Uh, in good spirits.

As little cost down as at 16. One could reasonably hope to be with the world of India before one.

Then, with the Indian rebellion underway. I'm sorry that at this time I know no one in Calcutta.

My second boy was there the other day. Or is there now?

But whether he will be sent in these distracted Indian times, it is impossible to calculate.

Our Indian boy was a dum dum, um, which means a school of musketry some six miles from Calcutta when last heard of.

He likes the country and and the life of all things, and is quite happy.

My second boy is attached to the 42nd Highlanders and in the thick of the Indian tussle.

So Walter Dickens stayed on in India after the East India Company dissolved and he simply started working for the British Army.

But then he started racking up debts. He was ready, um, to come back to England when he died very suddenly in Calcutta.

On the last day of the old year.

At a 5:15 in the afternoon, he was talking to the other patients about his arrangements for coming home when he became excited,

coughed violently, had a great gush of blood from the mouth and fell dead.

All this in a few seconds. My poor boy died in a very few moments, and with his mind full of coming home.

Walter Dickens died in the very same year that Raj Mohan's wife was published.

Born Kim Chandra Chopra Batai, was born in 1838, in a village near Calcutta.

His family was from the highest Brahmin cost.

He was one of the first people to graduate from the University of Calcutta, and he went into the civil service.

So in other words, he was steeped in colonial culture.

The project to educate the colonial subject. This complex period of cultural and intellectual flowering in 19th and 20th century Bengal.

Um is known in some quarters as the Bengali Renaissance, but that's a complicated term.

So bunking was working as a deputy magistrate in East Bengal when he wrote Raj Man's Wife.

As I mentioned, it was his first novel, um, and the only novel that he ever wrote in English.

He went on to become one of India's pre-eminent novelists in Bangla.

Um, and in fact, his very first masterpiece in Bangla.

He came hot on the heels of Raj Mohan's wife.

Just within a few months. Rich man's wife, then, is a complete anomaly, but I'm keen to suggest that it isn't just a curiosity,

that it can be analysed and that it can tell us something important.

So here is a bit more about the history of the text. It was serialised in 1864, in The Indian Fields, an English weekly magazine.

It had an absolutely tiny circulation and we don't know who read it.

It's very unlikely that the novel made much of an impact at the time.

If you read the novel,

you can see that it starts in quite a leisurely way and then speeds up and becomes more and more and more dramatic before ending extremely abruptly.

Um, that's because Kim probably lost interest and needed to wrap things up.

You know, when you're serialising something, you have to kind of kind of do something about it, don't you?

Um, you know, it's sort of out there in the public space.

Um, I would highly recommend, if you're looking to read this novel yourselves, I'd highly, highly recommend an edition.

Um, uh, by Meenakshi Mukherjee. That's the penguin edition.

Um, which is, I believe, in the Bodleian. But Kim never wrote fiction in English again.

That decision, a writer's choice of language or refusal to write in a language, is incredibly charged in this kind of environment.

That being said, we should remember that a novel written out of a colonial context isn't just going to be about that context.

We can't force it to carry all of that political weight.

Um, I'm going to take you through the plots, hopefully fairly swiftly.

Just so that you can get a sense of the novel shape and concerns.

I would recommend just reading. It is really short. Um, Rich Man's Wife is just over 100 pages long.

It's a curtailed novel. I would read you the first page or so, just to give you a flavour for the style.

Um, and will then try to summarise with the caveat that it is quite complicated, and I'll explain sort of why it feels so stuffed with plot.

It crams a lot into those 100 pages, and that frenetic Plotinus is part of its aesthetic effect.

So that's how the novel is meant to work. So here we are.

There is a small village on the river Modum on account of its being the residence of wealthy Zamindar.

It is regarded as a village of importance. One afternoon the summer heat was gradually abating with the weakening of the once keen rays of the sun.

A gentle breeze was blowing.

It began to dry the perspiring brow of the peasant in the field, and play with the moist loks of village women just risen from their siesta.

It was after such a siesta that a woman of about 30 was engaged in her toilette and a humble thatched cottage.

She took very little time to finish the process, usually so elaborate with women kind.

A dish of water. A tin framed looking glass three inches wide and a comb matching it, and a comb matching it sufficed for the task.

Then a little vermilion adorned her forehead. Last of all, some betel leaves dyed her lips.

Thus armed, a formidable champion of the world conquering sects,

set out with a picture in her arm and pushing open the wattle gate of a neighbouring house, entered within it.

Um. So there are some interesting things to be said about gender in this novel.

Raj Mohan's wife opens as two women in a village in East Bengal go to the river to fill their pitchers with water.

One has been expressly forbidden to do this by her husband because he just doesn't want her to leave the house.

Uh, this heroine is mahogany. Uh, Raj Mohan's wife.

So I've tried to kind of plot out the character relationships here.

Um. I hope that kind of makes some sense anyway.

Um, she's 18 years old. Mahogany. As they return from the river.

Um, they pass two men who are sitting and talking in a garden.

So these two men are cousins matter. And of course, as mahogany passes, a gust of wind lifts her shawl, showing her face.

The men recognise her mother is her brother in law.

So her sister's husband rocks. Man is incredibly angry when mahogany returns.

She's clearly a long standing victim of domestic violence.

The novel then pauses to relate the history of these characters.

Martha and Martha are descended from a zamindar.

So that means a powerful landlord, an aristocrat who's got his property in less than straightforward circumstances.

So both men end up propertied. They are landowners. Matters.

Father is suspicious of the English and has refused to give his son an English education.

Mother's father, drawn to the city of Calcutta, has done the opposite.

Um Madhav. So this is the. In a way, the main kind of hero is a version of the Bengali model.

Look who is a gentleman who enjoys culture and who embraces contact with British cultural traditions.

Um. Martha marries mahogany. Sister.

Mahogany is already married to Raj Mohan. Because Raj Mohan is in dire straits, Madhav offers him a job as a kind of steward on his lands.

Um. The two couples move to the village of Rather Gunge.

We then return to the presents. Late at night, mahogany overhears a conversation between Raj, Aman and some dacoits or bandits outside.

They want to steal mother's property and his uncle's will, um, which has bequeathed him a fortune.

The whole plot is being orchestrated by mother mother's cousin.

Mahogany decides to go out into the terrifying night, running through the jungle to mother's and her manganese house so that she can warn them.

Molotov arms his tenants and they are able to ward off the bandits.

When Martha and Mahogany are alone, we realise that they have long loved one another,

so it's a melodramatic scene with lots of weeping and both knowing that there's nothing really to be done about it.

So when with Anthony returns home, she is apprehended by men, but manages to escape to Martha's house of all places.

Mother's two wives, Tara and John Polk, argue over Martha right to be their mother,

was captured by the bandits and imprisoned in a dungeon on Martha's property.

He hears strange shrieks and bangs. It's mahogany who has been locked away as a prisoner in another room.

Mothers and Tara rescue her. The bandits and Roger Mahone are caught and transported to the Andaman Islands as convicts.

When matter here. Is that an Irishman? The district magistrate is coming to set things in order.

He hangs himself in an extremely short final chapter.

The conclusion. We hear what happens to the other characters.

Mahogany goes to live with her parents, but dies an early death.

Um. As to the matter of John Pook and the rest born, King says some are dead and others will die,

throwing this flood of light on their past and future history.

I bid you, good reader, farewell. Um. And that's that.

Forgive what must have been, um, an incredibly confusing, uh, run through the plot.

Uh, I, you know, I hope you can imagine what it's like for all of that to get squashed into.

Just like, basically something the length of a novella, 100 pages.

Um, so it really, really covers a lot of ground. Um, and bear in mind that the novel is a shifting form as a genre,

something that develops over the course of the 19th century as writers test its potential and feel for its edges.

Raj Mohan's wife jolts from genre to genre.

There is an insistent, persistent narrative voice here, the cool irony of which sits uncomfortably alongside the novels melodrama.

There are moments where the narrator gives us a long.

Um, these moments are peppered through the book. So here's one example.

Um, we need not detain the reader with a detail of either the dialogue or the prattle, as if their purport.

We will do him the justice to presume he has already some conception.

So I wonder what this narrator real heavy handedness achieves.

What we might say about its effects. It means that the novel is constantly drawing attention to its own artifice.

Then, at the same time, there are moments of realism, everyday details that raise something of a smile in their humanness.

Like this description of two children. His elder brother had wilfully left his ink pots behind when going to school.

The child's eyes had fallen on it, and he was joyfully smearing his face with the ink.

He seemed to be afraid of his brother coming back and snatching the ink pot away, and so he was emptying the pot.

Then another reference to domestic mess.

The walls of all the chambers above and below were well striped with numerous streaks of red, white, black, green.

All the colours of the rainbow caused by the skittles of such as, had found their mouths too much encumbered by pon.

So pon is a kind of red mixture of nuts and vine wrapped in a leaf, which is chewed.

And then there's this image, which is, uh, kind of beautiful, almost like a painting.

The sun was shedding its mellowed parting beams on the house of Marcus, and the day which had us had been sorry,

and the day which had been ushered in amidst the gloomy deeds which threatened the fate of mahogany, was hasting to a close.

The slanting rays fell at intervals on an open veranda on the second floor.

Tara was seated on the bare ground and was employed in tying the hair of her daughter in a copper, which is a bun.

Smudges of ink on a child's face. Stains of pot on a wall.

Rays of sunlight on a veranda. These examples come together to create a sense of a world where people and things leave their tiny traces.

So as I raced through the plots, I'm sure you noticed how much of the novel is sensational.

Bong Kim is clearly importing recognisable tropes from British fiction the crumbling gothic dungeon, um, for example.

So take a look at this description of mahogany when she confesses her love, um, to her brother in law.

You weep, said mother, if you are unhappy. Mahogany replied, and mahogany replied not, but sobbed.

Then, as if under the influence of a maddening agony of soul, she grasped his hands in her own, and bending over them her lily face.

So that motive trembled under the thrilling touch of the delicate curls that fringed her spotless brow.

She bathed him in a flood of warm and gushing tears.

He covered his eyes with his palm, and his palm became wet with tears.

So this is, um, textbook melodrama. Emotive, highly embodied and performative.

Hyperbolic. We don't know which British novels were born.

Kim's nearest literary influences when he was writing Raj Mohan's wife.

But critics have agreed that sensation fiction seems to be a ghostly presence.

It's the right decade, after all. These critics also note that Boon Kim mentions debts to the writers a Gwm Reynolds,

Edward Bulwer Lytton, and Wilkie Collins's The Woman in White elsewhere.

So it seems that tropes and genres have moved across borders.

What he is doing is he's trying to fit Bengali stories into British literary frameworks with fascinating results.

So the first question we might ask ourselves upon reading any colonial text is how it channels global narratives of power.

In other words, we'd ask what it has to say about nation and empire.

The references in man's wife are oblique rather than in your face, which I think makes the novel much more interesting.

How does Bong Kim create a sense of place? And what version of the world do we find within this novels pages?

How far do its borders stretch? And in an influential critical study, um,

Elaine Freed good explains how British interiors in Victorian fiction are crammed full of objects with fugitive histories.

Um, so, um, these are objects from the empire in Russia.

Hence why we find the situation strangely reversed.

So this is Martha's grand but ill kempt house in rather gunge.

On the two remaining walls and place lower than the terrific Khali, and the gorgeous Durga might be seen arrayed.

A few specimens of European art, and the exquisite conception of the Virgin and Child might itself be seen adorning the chamber,

the inmates of which had little knowledge what the artist's genius and engraver skill had strove to represent.

So basically on the wall we find images of Hindu god goddesses Kali and Durga, but also European art and Christian iconography in plain sight.

And the crucial thing in this passage is that they bear no symbolic weight whatsoever.

Um, no one in the house knows what they are supposed to represent. So do they have fugitive meaning or no meaning?

It's possible to make that argument both ways. A postcolonial reading might see this as a comment about the silent but constant and

oppressive presence of the coloniser in apparently native space imperialism writ small.

There is an alternative reading, though, that the colonisers may be here, but they're roundly ignored in the rhythms of everyday life.

When a man wielding imperial power does appear, um, at the end of the novel to sort everything out.

It is a shrewd and restlessly active Irishman.

The district magistrate. It is extremely telling, I think, that he's Irish rather than English.

Um, not quite a comfortable or straightforward representative of the ruling state.

Thanks to the magistrate's intervention. Roger Mann is transported at the end of the novel.

So we aren't told where. But it must be the Andaman Islands, which were used as a penal colony during British rule.

Transportation is always a fascinating trope or narrative event in Victorian writing.

Um, but it's usually to Australia in fiction.

So remember what happens to Maggie, which in Great Expectations he's transported as a convict to New South Wales.

Transportation is the expulsion and displacement of criminals and transgressors to a peripheral elsewhere,

a space that is imagined, conveniently forgotten, that always there.

These, then, are interesting narrative details that speak, um,

to the relationship between tiny, rather gunge and the monstrous, massive colonial machine.

But that relationship even seeps into the narration itself.

When we're told that she, my sister, was still of that tender age.

Um, when wives in her country speak always timidly to their husbands.

Um, we spoke for a second. Her country, um, is surely one country, the country in which the novel is being serialised and read.

So the implied distance there, um, feels strange.

We don't know. In other words, where Bone Kim is placing or situating his assumed reader.

You could say the same about this odd moment, which is, I think, the most unusual in the book.

McConkey has just returned from the river with her pitcher of water, and Roger Morgan is threatening to strike her as he intimidates her.

When the narrator steps in, it is unnecessary to try the patience of my readers by reproducing all of his Billingsgate.

Billingsgate was speaking in Billingsgate is a shorthand for using bad language.

The narrator is alluding to Richmond's abusive manner of speaking to his wife.

Using a euphemism to avoid printing his exact words.

So there's a kind of decorum almost there in the narration.

The time comes from the Billingsgate Fish Market in London, where apparently bad language was the order of the day.

The use was idiomatic in English by the stage, and it referred to the shocking,

earthy conduct of 17th and 18th century fish wives who bullied hapless and overeducated

gentlemen and filled the neighbourhood with their distinctive street cries.

You can see the gender dynamics being swapped. Um.

The reference to Billingsgate in Roger Morgan's wife just seems to pop out of the text.

You crash into it as you're reading, it sets up an imaginative bridge between central London and rural East Bengal.

The Thames and the rivers. The distant and the proximate.

So I've been wondering what on earth is that word doing in this novel?

The appearance of Billingsgate in this unlikely place makes us stop to think about linguistic colonialism,

the intertwined histories of, um, imperialism and language, fluency, idiom, oral culture, and also about translation.

So the original English section in which this example appears has been lost.

The first few chapters are Banerjee's 1935 translation of Bong Kim's own self translation of the novel into Bangla.

So it's confusing. Um, so I'll say it another way too. Bong Kim wrote an English novel, but we've never discovered the full text.

We don't have the full English novel. That's because the magazine in which it was published was so ephemeral.

We just, you know, magazines are notorious for getting lost to time.

At some point in his career. Um, he started translating it from English into Bangla.

In 1935. So you know a good what is that, 40, 50, 70 years later?

Somebody took the first couple of Bangla chapters and translated them back into English.

And to give us this patched together version of a complete novel that we now have today.

So now we can return to Billingsgate. If you translate King's Bangla sentence into English in a very literal sentence, we end up somewhere else.

So this is my own mother's translation. She helped me with the language, which says something about my own, uh, mixed fluency.

So this is her translation of one King's Bangla. I won't torture my readers ears by quoting those sweet words here.

Banerjee's translation to the one we have now swaps the straight sarcasm of the Bangla for the English idiom Billingsgate.

This ripple in the text not only suggests real intentionality on the translator's

part suggests a translator is always making their own version of a text.

Um, but it also indicates how many ways a novel might contend with or accommodate linguistic violence.

It shows us in practice the richness and messiness of working with world literature.

Um, sometimes, as I say, it's helpful to look at something really tiny in order that we might notice something big.

So those are some of the ways in which the novel thinks through the relationship between India and Britain.

Next, I want to figure out, um, how much it establishes a dichotomy between the rural and urban.

The countryside in the city. Uh, the answer is simple here.

It certainly does. We have Martha, who is rooted in the village and mother who loves Calcutta and everything that Calcutta represents.

We have mahogany, whose accent reveals she is no daughter of the banks of the modern Moti,

but was born and brought up on the ratty in some place near the capital.

So both of these are rivers, one that goes through what is now rural Bangladesh, the other near Calcutta.

The village. Metropol. Paradigms. Raymond William identifies in British writing, is clearly at work in Bowen Kim's novel,

which explores the cultural and topographical differences between East and West Bengal.

When the newly married her, Mangini worries about leaving her parents him speaks with irony, teasing his own character.

It was a far, far country whither she was going. And would she ever come back to the scene of her earliest affection?

Though it's a joke, it also reminds us that there are different definitions of distance and proximity,

and that is actually any novel job to weigh these definitions up.

The broader effect, of course, is to remind us that Indian space isn't a monolith,

that it functions according to its own internal rules, at least as much as it's anchored to the British Imperial Centre.

We aren't in Calcutta for very long in this novel. To be honest, we are only there for the span of a sentence.

Instead, Raj Mohan's wife gives us a detailed set of observations and arguments about

agrarian society in what is now Bangladesh in the 19th century East Bengal.

The novel is about locality. For Ian Duncan, the regional or provincial novel in Victorian Britain exists as a distinctive genre.

The characteristics of the setting are that it is distinctive, differentiated from the metropolis with,

um for or from other regions within the nation, and that it is at the same time familiar.

The province or region may represent an authentic site or source of national identity, a distillation of the nation,

or it may take the place of a larger national identity that has failed,

or it may register a wholesale disintegration of the categories of home origin.

Community belonging. The region is a place in itself, the source of its own terms of meaning and identity.

While the province is a typical setting defined by its difference from London.

So this is a layered and persuasive essay. So Duncan is talking about the possibility of an organic relation to place.

His examples include Hardy's Wessex and Trollope's Pasture.

He focuses on Hardy and Trollope's insistence in or fascination with the local,

rather than the pull of the Metropolitan on the one hand, or the broad sweep of the global on the other.

I wonder whether Roger Mohan's wife speaks to some of these concerns.

It is rooted in region, but it's thousands of miles away from Wessex or Basseterre.

So I'm going to go back to those opening sentences. There was a small village on the river, more than 40.

On account of its being the residence of wealthy Zamindar, it is regarded as a village of importance.

One afternoon the summer heat was gradually abating with the weakening of the once keen rays of the sun.

A gentle breeze was blowing.

It began to dry the perspiring brow of the peasant in the field, and play with the moist loks of village women just risen from their siesta.

And so we're told from the start that there are structures of power in place in rather gunge.

The novel is about the struggles between wealthy landowners or them in the US.

So in fact, um, one of the later chapters has a decidedly Jane Austen ish opening pronouncement.

It is a notorious fact that many eminent zamindar families in Bengal owe their rise to some ignoble origin.

One step away, I'm sure you will agree from a truth universally acknowledged.

But there's also a deep interest in the everyday life of the villager.

That day. Access. There is a small village on the river is a real statement of presence.

Whenever we hear about the breeze, it's in relation to the people that it touches.

Drying the sweat of the labourer. Teasing women's hair.

Lifting his veil as she comes back from the river with a pitcher of water, though mahogany frets that there are crocodiles in the river.

Um. It is mainly a sight, a friendly communion between women.

When Rodman pours the water out of modern Guinea's pitcher into a dust heap, it's dramatically cruel because that pitcher represents something deeper.

Martha and Martha sit in an ornamental garden of a kind, rare in East Bengal, full of roses and mallika.

So it's a kind of jasmine which caressed the eyes of passers by.

So there's this idea of beauty rather than utility.

Something bunkum associates with West Bengal. Meanwhile, a hut has mud floors and bamboo walls.

Some brinjal and salads were growing on the carefully tilled plot of land.

In front of the raised terrace before the outer room, the hall was enclosed by a red fence with a bamboo gate.

So there's a real continuity between house and land. Mud, bamboo and reed are all used to build shelter.

We get a sense of the kinds of small farming going on here.

But then do we? Um, brinjal and salads.

Uh, brinjal. Are aubergines fine.

Um, but we're now actually, Mukherjee, the editor of the novel, has noted that salad just isn't really a thing for Bengalis.

It is a rewording in English for a shadowy, implied reader.

Once again, if we get close to the text, it raises more questions than it answers about the writing of location and locality, landscape and ecology,

the ways in which the provincial and the regional US either deflect attention from or contribute to our understanding of the nation.

How does the colonial subject bring their landscape to life on the page?

It's a battleground, a contested space.

If we're thinking about geopolitics, but it's also something more immediate, something that is lived in and lived through.

So one game is really, really specific.

For example, when it comes to trees in a 100 page novel, we hear about groves of mango trees, birch trees, which is a kind of Indian oak.

Cocoa palms, date palms. Acacia tamarins.

Safari and Baku. Um, a papaya, which is a kind of cuckoo can be heard trilling.

I am particularly want to talk about the jungle. A word that in English, um, that the English language is actually taken straight from Sanskrit.

Um, you might want to compare the etymology of, um, jungle and forest.

So forest comes from the Old French and the medieval Latin jungle, also jungle.

Uh, Hindi, etc. etc., etc. from the Sanskrit.

Um in India, originally as a native word. The jungle surrounding.

Rather, gunge is a liminal space, a space where dacoits or bandits make themselves at home.

They take shelter between the roots of a mango tree, hide out in the undergrowth.

Signal to each other by calling like screech owls.

So if you take a look at John Lockwood Kipling's 1891 book Beast and Man in India, you'll see how these are birds of evil as well as a good omen.

The owl is here, as elsewhere, a byword for ill luck.

If you're interested in developing some of this work, you could take a look at these non-fictional texts.

National history and natural histories of India. For want of a better word that I've produced by British writers, it's another genre.

Another way of engaging with the colony and filtering it through British eyes.

In this novel, the dacoit is a version of the Gothic bandit, and Boom Kim is clearly locating criminality in the jungle.

Dacoit and jungle exist in a kind of mutually reinforcing relationship.

Mahogany, though, has the most complex relationship, um, and connection to the land, and more precisely, to the jungle, to the same space.

She feels a pang of nostalgia when she remembers her childhood with her sister.

Childhood. That time when she used to lie in the open air, arm in arm with her beloved Mangini,

gazing on the silver orb that poured the sweet light and the interminable deep blue ocean on which she sailed, lying on the land, looking at the moon.

Clearly this is freedom. She moves to open her bedroom window because it is too hot and stuffy inside.

She wants to let in some air, and as I mentioned before, when she overhears the midnight plot to rob Mother and Mangini,

she decides to go out into the jungle, run to their house and warn them.

I'll read you the passages first so that you get a sense of what's going on.

The chapter has a subtitle in which the author narrowly misses an opportunity of introducing a few ghosts,

and regrets that he cannot gratify his young readers.

At this hour of dread, loneliness a young woman would have would have to thread her way through a wild and jungly path.

She was, naturally enough, superstitious,

and her rich imagination was stored with tales of an earthly hunters of the woods, and had fed on them since infancy.

The knotted tree trunks of huge trees showed like so many unearthly forms.

Watching her progress in malignant silence. And each leafy bough that shot over her darkened path.

She fancied there lurked a demon. In each dark recess, she could see the skulking form and glistening eyes of a spectre or a robber.

All the wild tales she had heard, a fierce visages and ghostly grins that had appalled to death.

The belated traveller rushed to her imagination.

The light crack of the falling leaf. The flapping wings of some frightened night bird.

As it changed its unseen seat. Among the dark branches.

The slight rustle of crawling reptiles among the fallen leaves.

Even her own footsteps made her heart fainter and fainter.

So then the bandits hear something, and mahogany makes her way to a dark pool of water,

gently gliding into the water at a spot where the spreading branches of the bore cast deep shadow.

She sat down, immersed to her chin so that nothing but her head was visible,

if indeed it could be seen where the dark water of the pool was made darker by the sombre shade of the tree.

But still apprehensive lest the fair complexion of her lily face should betray her.

She unloose the knot of her hair and spread the dark, luxuriant tresses on all sides of her head,

so that not even the closest scrutiny could now distinguish from above the dark hair floating over the darkened pool.

It might be an affidavit, which means a demon that I have seen, says the dacoit.

It's an evil spirit. The next day.

After the adventure, Watson Guinea is back at the pool of water.

The reader will now follow us to the pool, which had been the scene of Madame Guinea's temporary danger and escape on the previous night.

The sun had run up two hours course in the heavens, beneath a young tamarind tree, where the surrounding underworld lent a sort of cover.

Mahogany sat on the moist grass. Her clothes were wet.

Her sari had been soiled with mud.

Her usually curly tresses, washed by the drizzling rain, now fell in straight and loosely flowing bands on her neck and arms,

and her head was slightly bent to permit the sunbeams to play on that raven hair

darker than any cloud which had ever opposed their progress through the atmosphere.

So just to, um, pass those passages, we have that tonally strange subtitle which acknowledges our expectations.

Um, there it is, um, of a literary jungle, that it's gothic, that we need ghosts.

Mahogany is terrified of spectres, and the dacoits mistake mahogany for an evil spirit.

These are moments of camouflage and and and immersion.

In the second scene, um, every part of his clothing and her body is touched by the elements rain, mud, sunlight.

Even her hair is described as darker than cloud.

Note that particularly striking moment when she glides into the water, loosens her hair, covers her face.

Um. It's as if the line between human and spirit is smudged.

My niece movement into nature brings her potentially transgressive qualities into relief.

Remember that she's in love with her sister's husband and she passionately declares this love.

Meanwhile, Meenakshi Mukherjee and Supriya Chaudhary, who are both on on the Bibliography and Canvas um,

have explained that Jenny's journey owes a lot to Vaishnava poetry.

Um, it's an image. Um, it's that Sanskrit poetry in which Radha secretly runs to meet her lover, the god Krishna, in the jungle.

It's one of those important relations between the spiritual and the erotic in devotional poetry.

So just to round off postcolonial responses to 19th century literature might try to unearth references

to imperialism in the novels and poems that we know and love the stalwarts of the Victorian canon.

But I hope that this lecture has shown you how we might extend that conversation to think in a way that's more consciously global.

I think that's what this particular lecture series is kind of about.

It's about acknowledging extremely simply that literary cultures exist everywhere,

and that reading the first Indian novel in English adds layers to our understanding of power, geopolitics, language and literary form.

Thank you very much for coming.

