[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
Hello, everyone. Um, can everyone hear me?

Great. So welcome to this lecture in the literary Literary Worlds World World Literature series.

And it's the second lecture I'm giving out of three.

In today's lecture, we'll focus on a particular category of texts women's religious writing in Christian Europe particularly.

And we'll think about the broader European context for understanding English texts,

as well as thinking about how we might connect this women's writing to other religious traditions.

In this lecture for reasons of time and space.

I am thinking beyond England, but still thinking primarily about Europe.

So it's different from last week's lecture and next week's lecture,

when will be actively challenging a Eurocentric perspective of medieval literature.

We will, though, use the last bit of the lecture to think beyond Europe and think about other cultures and traditions beyond the Christian.

Now, there were many kinds of religious women in the Christian tradition in the medieval period.

You had nuns that belonged to different religious orders or groups that followed certain regulations.

Dominican, Franciscan, Cistercian.

Carthusian. These were all religious orders that nuns could belong to.

You had and caresses or anchorite, or women who lived in, enclosed in a cell attached to a church.

There is debate about the best time to use, because the feminine and caress wasn't used in the medieval period,

but either anchoress or anchorite is generally accepted today.

You also had devout lay women, so women who didn't follow an official religious career as such, but still wanted to live a devout Christian life.

And outside of England, we have the begins.

That begins with groups of women in the Low Countries, so modern day Belgium, Luxembourg,

the Netherlands and parts of France and Germany, who led a devout life but did not take formal vows.

I know many of these women. These women belonging to these categories and beyond were mystics or visionaries.

What we find is that many of these women experienced exciting and meaningful visions of Christ and the devil,

and many of them shared their visions and insights through writing.

This offered a kind of strength and authority for these women,

even though they were functioning in a deeply patriarchal culture where the standard for written authority was itself deeply masculine.

At times these women didn't compose themselves, but that or they didn't write it down themselves.

But their visions and insights were conveyed by writing either through scribes,

their own words, through scribes, or writing by other people about their lives.

Now, when we think of women's religious texts in English from the medieval period, our minds might be drawn to two women in particular.

Julian of Norwich and Margery Camp.

We'll begin with these two women accordingly, but then we'll think about other women throughout Europe who might be brought into dialogue with them,

and will finally think about women belonging to other religious traditions around the world.

So that's just a summary of what we'll do. Julian and Marjorie, European women beyond England and women of other religious traditions.

So to begin with, Julian of Norwich, who was she?

Julian of Norwich is exceptional in being the first woman known to have composed a book in English,

The well Known Revelations of Divine Love, or showings of Divine Love.

But her exceptionality extends far beyond this one fact.

She was a writer of immense talent, composing intricate, vivid prose in which she recounted extraordinary visions of Christ.

When she was around 30 years old.

She suffered a severe and life threatening illness that precipitated a series of powerful visions of Christ, his love, and his saving grace.

She felt compelled to share these visions, and it is this that forms the basis of her revelations or showings.

Julian survived her illness, living to old age as an anchorite attached to a church in Norwich.

We know little about her life beyond these details.

Julian's work forms part of a rich landscape of vernacular devotional writing in the 14th and 15th centuries.

She is also considered one of the five canonical mystics in Middle English in the company of Margery Camp,

Richard Roland, Walter Hilton, and the anonymous author of The Cloud of Unknowing.

She also flourished in and contributed to a period that saw English grow in status as a literary language.

Her contemporaries include Geoffrey Chaucer, assumed to be born the same year as Julian in 1343,

William Langland and the anonymous poet of Sir Gawain and the Green Knight.

Whilst Julian is a crucial part of the remarkable literary and cultural milieu of 13 14th century England.

She is also unique for the well-recognised beauty and complexity of her prose and for the sophistication of her theology.

Her writing is subtle and sensual, brimming with striking images and intricate wordplay.

Julian's first version of her work, known as the Short Text, was expanded significantly 20 years later into the long text,

now recognised as one of the most outstanding literary works in the history of English literature.

In her revelations, Julian tells of her visions while also weaving a multifaceted theological tapestry.

The very heart of Julian's theology is love, an all encompassing love that takes in all of humanity and all of creation.

As put by Will Shangri-La. God is boundless, unconditional, and all embracing love.

He is bound to all creatures and loves. Indeed, he is in all creatures.

As Julian herself says, love is God's fundamental meaning.

Her visionary experiences recounted in the revelations include imagining the entirety of creation as something like a haze,

or not seeing a close up view of Christ's face as he must wear the crown of thorns.

An attack by the devil himself, and an insight into Christ's heart as a spacious place in which all humankind can dwell.

Crucially, Julian never sees sin itself.

She confronts sin as noble by the manifold harms it causes.

Her extended reflections also include a consideration of Christ as a mother who labours painfully for and nurtures humankind.

This is what we're told about her visions. These revelations were show to a simple creature that could know later.

The year of our Lord 1373, the eighth day of May.

Which creature desired for three gifts of God?

So Julian asserts the limits of her knowledge and literacy, but makes a claim for experiencing these visions.

She describes how divisions begin, instigated by her illness.

As you see up here. My sight began to failing, and it was all dark about me in the chamber,

as it had been night, save in the image of the cross wherein I beheld a common light.

And I wist not how all that was beside the cross was ugly to me, as if it had been marred, much occupied with the feelings.

Summing up Julian's visionary experience, Georgina Crampton says Julian's showings comprise visual images,

words that emerge in her mind, fully articulated and spiritual events without sensuous representation, either visual or verbal.

She carefully reports not only the content of her experiences, but also their modes of perception.

This is important for us.

Julian is a self-conscious, self-reflexive author where both of the visions themselves, but also the mode in which they are expressed or experienced.

Julian has 16 revelations in total.

Um, she sees Christ's crowning with thorns, the discolouration of his face.

She sees that God made everything and is in everything.

She sees the scorching of Christ's body, the fiend overcome by the Passion of Christ.

Worshipful thanking of our Lord. Feeling of joy and sorrow.

The final sufferings of Christ. The Trinity of the passion.

She sees that Christ shows in love, his heart cloven into.

And then she sees, um, the ghostly showing of Christ's mother.

She sees the Lord as the most worthy being. She sees the Lord turning old blame into endless worship.

And she sees the Lord as the foundation to be sought.

Through prayer and secure trust. She conveys that will be taken from our suffering and find our reward with the Lord in heaven.

And finally, the Trinity saves and preserves us out of love, she says, and we shall not be overcome of our enemy.

So that's Julian of Norwich. Let's now turn to Marjorie Kempe.

Who was she? She was a lay woman and businesswoman born in King's Lynn in Norwich.

She had 14 children. She experienced a powerful vision of Jesus after the birth of her first child, and continued to have visions throughout her life.

And inspired by her visions, she travels the world and engages with many important political figures of her time.

Her book is written down by scribes, one of whom identifies himself as Sally Krauss.

And her book includes her account of her meeting Julian.

When Julian was an anchoress. So here is a taste of the book of Marjorie Kemp.

Marjorie has both the Virgin Mary and other saints speak to her as you see up here.

Sometime Our Lady spoke to her mind. Sometimes Saint Peter, sometimes Saint Paul, sometimes Saint Catherine.

Before what saint in heaven she had devotion to appeared to her soul and taught her how she should love in our Lord, and how she should please in him.

And this is the description of when she encounters a crucifix, or any act of violence that reminds her of Jesus's crucifixion.

Sometime when she saw the crucifix, if she saw or if she saw a man had a wound or a beast, whether it were,

or if a man beat a child before her, or smote a horse or another beast with a whip, if she might seen it,

a hearing it, her sword, she saw our Lord being beaten or wounded, like as she saw in the man or in the beast,

as well in the field as in the town, and by herself alone, as well as among the people.

So any act of violence she sees reminds her of the crucifixion.

She's also overcome when she sees a baby suckling because it reminds her of Jesus Christ as an infant.

Another time, right as she came by a poor woman's house.

The poor woman clipped her into her house and did her sitting by her little fire, giving her wine to drink in a cup of stone.

And she had a little man child suckling on her breast.

The witch sucked while on the mother's breast, another while it ran to this creature, the mother sitting full of sorrow and sadness,

that this creature, as in Margery, burst all into weeping, as though she had seen Our Lady and her son in the time of the passion.

And this is the description of when she goes to visit Julian.

She was bitten by our Lord for to go to an anchor.

Anchor rests in the same city, which was who was called Dame Julienne.

And so she did and showed her the grace that God put in her soul.

And many wonderful revelations which she showed to the anchoress, to wit, if they were any deceit in them.

For the inquest was an expert in such things, and good counsel could give the anchoress hearing for the marvellous goodness of our Lord.

Highly thanked God with all her heart for his visitation, counselling this creature to be obedient to the will of our Lord God,

and fulfilling with all her might whatever he put in her soul.

So Margery meets Julian, and Julian bolsters her and gives her encouragement.

So we've thought about Julian of Norwich and Margery Camp and have begun to explore their works.

But these women were not isolated from the rest of Europe, or indeed from the rest of the world.

Let's now look at other European women who might be put in dialogue with our English authors.

We're now in the second part of the lecture. This will be a bit of a whirlwind tour where we'll consider a range of different women.

And the idea is to give you a taste of all these authors and visionaries out there whom you might like to study.

When you look at Christian visionary literature in English and beyond.

The plan isn't for you to have to know everything about all these women,

but rather to choose a couple of women with whom you are in whom you are particularly interested, and perhaps research more about them.

So we'll begin with a woman called Marie, 28.

She was from Brabant Liege, which would now be in modern day Belgium.

She was a semi recluse associated with the beginnings.

And we know about her through her life. Written by an author called James of Victory.

Like Marjorie Kemp, she is known for weeping very copiously.

She weeps to such an extent that the ground beneath her becomes muddy, and she soaks through several linen cloths.

And she's even actually mentioned in the book of Marjorie Kemp in chapter 62.

So as I mentioned, we know about memory through a life written by her priest and confessor, James of Victory.

A famous passage in James of Victory's life describes a horde of women in complete rapture, wasting away in divine love.

You saw other women who were wasting away with such an intimate and wonderful state of love in God,

that they languished with desire, and for many years could not rise from their beds.

There was no other cause for their owners except him, since their souls had melted with desire the more ill they were in body.

When they were resting delightfully in the Lord, the more they were comforted in spirit.

They cried out in their hearts, although from modesty they pretended differently.

Stay me up with flowers compassed me about with apples, because I languish with love.

That last quote there, um, invokes the Bible song of songs five six and two five.

Now in this Life of Mary 20 by James of Victory, we are told that Marie,

much like Marjorie Kempe, weeps uncontrollably when thinking of Christ and his sufferings,

as we are told, as you see up here once, just before Holy Thursday, when the Passion of Christ was approaching.

She began, began to offer herself up as a sacrifice to the Lord with an even greater flood of tears, sighs, and sobs.

One of the priests of the church, exhorted her with honey tongued rebukes to pray in silence and to restrain her tears.

She knew that she could not restrain these tears.

She therefore slipped quietly out of the church and hid herself in a secret place far from everyone.

But then on that very day, while the priest was celebrating mass.

It happened that his spirit was drowned with such a flood of tears that he almost suffocated.

The harder he tried to restrain this force, the more drenched he became and the more soaked did the book and the altar become.

Matt Mary, 28, also has various visions of Christ appropriate to certain peace feasts.

For example, in the Nativity, Christ appears as an infant suckling or in a cradle.

In the feast of the purification. He is offered by the Virgin in the temple and received by Simeon.

Let's now move on to another European woman. Loot cart of a we have like married one year.

She's from the Low Countries. She belong to religious orders from the age of 12.

And her life was written by someone called Thomas of Canterbury.

On one one Pentecost. Loot God floats in the air in one of her raptures on the holy day of Pentecost,

when the nuns were chanting Veni Creator Spiritus in choir, they manifestly salute.

God was raised in the air, two cubits from the earth.

Like other devotees, though, it might seem shocking to us today.

Loot cart also drinks from the side wound of Christ.

At the very entrance to the church. Christ, all bloody and nailed to the cross, came to meet her, lowering his arm which was affixed to the cross.

He embraced her, who was opposite, and pressed her mouth to the wound in his right side.

There. She drank in so much sweetness that from that time onwards she was always more robust and quicker in the service of God.

So this visceral moment of intimacy definitely has erotic overtones,

but it is also fundamentally about finding intimacy with the crucified, wounded Christ in different ways.

Loved God, even he is. Christ's wounds call out to her.

And Christ shows his wounds to look.

God declaring, behold and contemplate, dearest, that my wounds are crying out to you, lest in vain I shed my blood, lest in vain I endure death's.

Loot, asks what this means, and Christ explains that the crying out of the wounds means that it is to lessen the wrath of the father against sinners.

So the wounds crying out to loot God sent on Christ's wounds as offering salvation.

Further to this crucified intimacy limit, God has a vision of Christ's heart joining with hers in an act of union.

Thus, from time that time on, there occurred a communion of hearts,

or rather the union of an uncreated spirit with a created spirit through an excess of grace.

So she imagines her heart joining with Christ's lead card,

or has striking and potentially quite explosive vision in which she sees the former pope suffering in purgatory,

the limbo state of souls neither in heaven or [INAUDIBLE].

When she saw that the apparition was surrounded by an enormous flame.

She asked who it was and he said, I am Pope Innocent.

With a groan, she asked, how is it that you are the father of us?

All are being tortured with such great pain?

He told her, there are three reasons why I am thus tortured, and because of them, I was most worthy to be handed over to eternal torment.

But through the intercession of the Most Gracious Virgin Mary, for whom I built a monastery, I repented at the end and escaped eternal death.

Yet I will be tortured by the most atrocious punishments until the day of the Last Judgement.

The Mother of Mercy, however, obtained this for me from her son,

that I was able to come to you to ask for your suffrages, or, um, prayers or masses said for souls in purgatory.

Unfortunately, we never find out why the Pope is condemned to spend time in purgatory because the writer keeps it a secret, as he says.

Note well, reader, that Luther, God revealed these three reasons to me, but I will shroud them over out of reverence for so great a pontiff.

So we see Luther God having quite extraordinary visions and even seeing the Pope the ultimate authority in the Catholic Church in Purgatory.

Will now move on to another woman. Gertrude the Great.

Gertrude was a German mystic who wrote a text called The Herald of Divine Love,

and she is particularly linked to the devotion to the Sacred Heart, as we'll see.

Um, Gertrude frames her visions for us in the narrative of her life.

She tells her audience that I was in the 26th year of my age when,

on the Monday before the feast of the purification of thy most chaste mother, in the happy hour after Compline at the close of the day.

Thou the true light, who was clearer than any light, and yet deeper than any recess, having resolved to dissipate the obscurity of my darkness,

did sweetly and gently commence my conversion by appeasing the trouble with which thou hast excited in my soul.

For more than a month. So she speaks to Christ directly here.

Gertrude describes feeling and finding Christ within her all the time.

As she says, after whole weeks, when I return into my heart, I find thee there, so that I cannot complain that thou has left me even for a moment.

Gertrude imagines Christ's wounds being imprinted on her heart.

I perceive thou hadst imprinted in the depths of my heart the adorable marks of thy sacred wounds, she says, even as they are on thy body.

So we see good Gertrude here receiving a kind of stigmata, an imprint of Christ's wounds on her heart.

She shows us this central city of Christ's adorable marks of his sacred wounds, as she calls them,

so that she draws attention to the wounds deep and abiding significance to every devout soul.

Gertrude is, um, sorry. That's the quote there about, um, the imprinting on the heart.

Gertrude is also important for nurturing devotion to the Sacred Heart of Christ.

The most cataclysmic and precious wound was that inflicted on Christ's heart due to the side wound.

And the New Catholic Encyclopaedia notes that little by little.

Devotion to the Sacred Heart of Jesus became something fully distinct from the devotion to the Five Sacred Wounds.

Devotion to the heart grew in the 13th century, and Gertrude the Great was very important in this development.

In book three, chapter 25 of The Herald of Divine Love, Gertrude receives Christ's heart in the likeness of the burning lamp.

And Christ says that he holds it for her in front of the eyes of her heart.

So the heart. The heart of Christ. Is there like a lamb in front of Gertrude's in a sight.

In the subsequent chapter, Christ stresses the lasting connection between his heart and Gertrude's heart.

And Gertrude drinks the pleasures of the heart through a golden something like a golden tube, eventually drawing her into the heart itself.

And in chapter 51 of book three, she feels, and he is the heart beats of Christ's heart as spoken messages.

Alexandra Barratt draws attention to the heart as a womb like space.

Gertrude finds the wounded heart's closest human analogy in the child's dimly remembered

uterine experience of its mother's heart beats that constantly soothes and reassure.

Okay will now move on to another European woman, Catherine of Siena.

Catherine of Siena was an Italian mystic who was also politically very active.

She was born in 1347 as a twin.

Her twin sister did not survive beyond infancy, but Catherine went on to live.

If not a long, then a very full and exciting life.

Catherine had a vision at the age of six.

Raising her eyes towards heaven.

She saw in the air not very high above the ground a loggia, a kind of gallery or room, rather small and full of light,

in which Christ appeared clothed in a pure white garment, like a bishop in his coat, with a crozier in his hand.

And he smiled at the young girl. And there issued from him as from the sun a ray which was directed at her.

So she has this vision when she's only six years old.

And then before the age of 15, she had a vision of a mystical marriage to Christ.

As you see up here, one day, she suddenly went out of the house and out of Siena by the porter descent,

and Sarno to a region where she thought there were certain doors and caves almost hidden from the eyes of men.

There she entered into one, and finding herself in a place where she could neither be seen or heard.

She kneeled on the ground and in a transport of overwhelming love called the Mother of Christ,

and with a childlike simplicity, asked her to give her in marriage to her son Jesus.

And praying. Thus she felt herself raised somewhat from the ground.

Into the air, and presently there appeared to her the Virgin Mary, with her son in ums, and giving the young girl a ring.

He took her as his spouse, and then suddenly disappeared, and she found herself set back on earth.

And she returned to Siena and to her home. So she has this vision in which he imagines a marriage to Christ.

Not an uncommon idea, this mystical marriage to Christ.

Catherine joined the Mass Manti latte, a group of devout women linked to the Dominican Order.

She wrote nearly 400 letters to a range of people, some of them very influential.

The recipients of her letters included popes, queens, cardinals, and lay men and women.

And she was centrally involved in political events of her time.

For example, she attempted to lead the Pope and the Florentine League to a mutual concord during the War of the Eight Saints.

Um, the companion to Catherine of Siena will tell you more about that.

Lee will now move on to Teresa of Avila.

Teresa of Avila was a Spanish mystic and writer, and her life and work resonates with English authors like Julian and Marjorie.

In Teresa's autobiography, known as Her Life, she tells us that she was weighted with a feeling of being wicked.

And she struggles with this sense of her own badness throughout her life, even though she was, to an outside observer, extremely pious.

Theresa experiences a range of visions which she conveys through her writings.

One of her most striking vision and visceral visions is when Theresa experiences being pierced to her innards by a spear wielding angel.

And there are clear erotic overtones to this vision.

As you see up here beside me, on the left hand appeared an angel in bodily form,

such as I am not in the habit of seeing, except very rarely, though I often have visions of angels.

I do not see them. But it was our Lord's will that I should see this angel in the following way.

He was not tall, but not short and very beautiful,

and his face was so aflame that he appeared to be one of the highest ranks of angels who seemed to be all on fire.

In his hands I saw a great golden spear, and at the iron tip there appeared to be a point of fire.

This, he plunged into my heart several times so that it penetrated to my entrails when he pulled it out.

I felt that he took them with it and left me utterly consumed by the great love of God.

The pain was so severe that it made me utter several names.

The sweetness caused by this intense pain is so extreme that one cannot possibly wish it to cease.

Nor is one soul then content with anything but God.

We see her hear the passionate, even erotic nature of the bonds religious women in the Christian tradition nurtured with God's.

But Teresa has other kinds of visions, too.

She sees the devil, for example, as does Julian of Norwich.

As Teresa says, as you see up here, once when I was in an oratory, the devil appeared on my left hand in a hideous form.

I particularly noticed his mouth because he spoke to me, and it was terrifying.

A great flame seemed to issue from his body, which was intensely bright and cast no shadow.

He said to me in a dreadful voice that I had indeed escaped from his clutches, but that he would capture me still.

I was greatly frightened, and made a shift to cross myself, whereupon he disappeared, but immediately came back again.

This happened twice, and I did not know what to do.

There was some holy water nearby, some drops of which I threw in his direction, and he did not return again.

And in her autobiography she describes a terrifying vision she has of how.

One day when I was at prayer, I found myself without knowing how plunged as I thought into [INAUDIBLE].

I understood that the Lord wished me to see the place that the devils had ready for me there, and that I had earned by my sins.

All this happened in the briefest second. But even if I should live for many years, I do not think I could possibly forget it.

The entrance seemed to me like a very long, narrow passage or a very low, dark and constricted furnace.

The ground appeared to be covered with a filthy wet mud, which smelled abominably and contained many wicked reptiles.

At the end was a cavity scooped out of the wall like a cupboard, and I found myself closely confined in it.

But the sight of all this was pleasant compared with my feelings.

There is no exaggeration in what I am saying.

And she expands on these painful feelings, my agony of soul and oppression,

a suffocation and an affliction so agonising and accompanied by such a hopeless

and distressing misery that no words I could find would adequately describe it.

To say that it was as if my soul were being continuously torn from my body is as nothing.

The fact is that I can find no means of describing that inward fire, and that despair which is greater than the severe, severest torments or pains.

I could not see my torturer, but I seemed to feel myself being burned and dismembered.

And I repeat that interior fire and despair were the very worst of all.

We see here that [INAUDIBLE] is both a physical place and, in a sense, a state of mind.

It does not just assault the physical senses, but also causes a deep agony of soul,

terrible misery and despair greater than any physical torment to resist, tells us.

This is an insight which Teresa shares with us about the true meaning of the suffering of [INAUDIBLE],

and resonates somewhat with what Julian of Norwich says about the worst suffering being a separation from God.

Okay. We've so far been concerned with Christian women in Europe.

But as I said at the start, I'd like to use the end of this lecture to think further afield.

So we're now at the third and final stage. Can we productively compare medieval Christy and European women with medieval

women who belong to other cultures and follow different religious traditions?

My own answer to that would be a definite yes.

But I think that all such comparative work has to be done carefully so that we approach all cultural traditions with sensitivity and care.

Last year, I supervised a student who did their dissertation on Julian of Norwich, Norwich, and a Kashmiri woman named Lal dead.

She compared the two and she did very well the student in the end, and got a distinction for her dissertation, like Julian of Norwich.

Lal dad was a 14th century woman, and like Julian, she was a mystic.

But unlike Julian, she belonged to the Shah of Islam tradition in Hinduism, which worships the god Shiva as the supreme deity.

And this student, as I mentioned, did a wonderful and creative comparative analysis of the two women.

Many poems are attributed to. Love that, and I'd like to share with you one of these.

Now that says wrapped up in yourself.

You hid from me all day. I looked for you.

And when I found you hiding inside me I ran wild playing.

Now me, now you. In this remarkable short poem, now that explores what it means to find the divine within oneself.

Recalling Julian of Norwich, his own theology of indwelling, and Gertrude's image of finding Christ within her heart.

So that it is one example. In my own work.

I have also compared Julian of Norwich with a woman who was an Islamic mystic or Sufi known as Rabia,

undoubtedly, but who lived quite a while before Julian of Norwich in the 18th century.

Rabiya also has many poems attributed to her, and I have argued that she can be brought into productive dialogue with Julian of Norwich.

I'll share with you one poem by Rabia. I love you with two loves.

The love of passion and the love that is due to you.

The love of passion absorbs me in remembrance of you without wondering.

And in the love that is due to you. You remove the veil so that I may see you.

So the prize is not mine in this, nor in that.

But rather praise is yours in this. And in that.

So the first kind of love, the love of passion, however, is not at all unworthy.

It is an intense, driven love of the divine.

But the second kind of love Divests love of any base.

So want or fear. This love becomes only that which is inherently due to the beloved.

There are powerful reasons for studying Julian and Raphael comparatively.

This includes their approach to divine intimacy and indwelling, encoded especially in their assertions on prayer and spiritual enclosure.

We may even find an Rabia, an early indirect forebear of Julian.

Raphael's poetry works with semantically rich terms and the use of dialectics inflected heavily with architectural images in rabbi's language.

God invades each particle of existence, redolent in speech and silence.

He enfolds and opens out. Julian's incarnational theology has.

Theology based on the body of Christ is marked by a semantic complex of holiness, indwelling enclosure, and self-destruction.

The beloved encompasses each soul while opening up each soul enclosure to the world.

And finally, to end, I'd like to share with you work done by a scholar called Alexandra Ferrini,

who compares Margery Camp with another Hindu mystic, this one called Mirabai.

Mirabai was an Indian woman who lived in the 16th century and is a figure who is still still revered today.

20th century posters of her show a beautiful person singing and dancing joyfully as Krishna looks on and participates with her.

All the posters depict her sitting peacefully, surrounded by avatars of the god.

There are many versions of Mirror BAe's life story.

We can deduce that she was a member of the royalty who gave up her status and devoted herself to her beloved Krishna,

rather than the husband with whom she had an arranged marriage.

She suffered years of persecution because of her calling.

Many songs in the Rajasthan language are attributed to Mirabai.

These are outpourings of love and longing for Krishna.

And in Alexandrov. Arrhenius work, she considers the model of female friendship in both Mirabai and Margery Camp,

and she argues that contact between cultures can itself be understood through a friendship model.

I hope that today's lecture has encouraged you to situate English women like Julian and Marjorie in broader European and global contexts.

Next week we'll be comparing Christian and Islamic mystical literature.

Thank you.

