[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
Hello, everyone. Uh, well done for making it for an early start today, will.

Early for humanities people. Um, so welcome to this lecture in the series Literary Worlds, World Literatures.

And you may well have been to previous ones and I'll be giving the next three lectures.

So today and the next two, and in these three lectures,

we're going to follow up on Professor Gareth Evans lecture last week to continue to think about medieval literature.

So literature roughly from 700 to 1500, though, as we'll see, that time period can be tricky.

So this is how the next three lectures will pan out.

In this first lecture today that I'm giving, I'll introduce the term Global Middle Ages,

and we'll think more about how to approach the medieval world from a global perspective.

I'll then focus on a particular theme,

how medieval poets and authors from around the world saw and interacted with the moon, as I hope this might interest you.

And it's a subject I've been researching lately, and I'd like to share some of that research with you.

Then in next week's lecture will focus on a particular category of texts women's religious Writing in Christian Europe,

and we'll think about the broader European context for understanding English texts in this category,

as well as thinking about how we might connect this women's writing to other religious traditions.

And then in the third lecture, so the week after next, I'll focus again on religious literature, but this time connecting Christianity and Islam,

thinking about how we can put English Christian texts in dialogue with Islamic texts in Arabic, Persian and other languages.

So today, this is what what we'll do.

I'll just take my cardigan off. It's quite warm. So we'll first talk about what is the global Middle Ages.

What do I mean by that and why is it important?

We'll then take the theme of the moon in approaching the global Middle Ages, and I'll explain why I'm doing that.

We'll then look at an English poem about a man in the moon, and we'll compare this to a Japanese prose text known as The Tale of the Bamboo Cutter.

And what we find is that in both the English poem and the Japanese story,

they both grapple with questions of exile, whether from the earth or from the moon itself.

The moon is at once a homeland and an otherworld in these works,

and both texts have profound sociopolitical questions which they attempt to grapple with and foreground.

So this is what we'll do today. These are the four parts of today's lecture.

Let's begin with part one. What is the global Middle Ages?

And why is it important? The global Middle Ages is a term coined by Geraldine Hang.

And I've given you the sources up here.

Um, and I'll, I'll make sure that I have these uploaded to canvas as well, so that you can access them after the lecture.

The Global Middle Ages is an idea that centres on challenging Eurocentric perspectives and seeing the broad medieval period from 500 to 1500.

From a global perspective, thinking of the world as a whole,

as an interconnected realm involving diverse voices and groups of people, as Geraldine Huang says.

The gains accruing from viewing the past globally are considerable.

A global perspective of the deep past not only counters Eurocentrism, but can transform our very understanding of history and of time itself.

As she also says, the study of globalism begins with and foregrounds interconnectivity.

In the first instance, the interconnectivity of lands around the world whose cultures, stories, religions, languages, art, goods, germs,

plants and technology were braided into relationship across distances that may have seemed vast, perhaps even almost unimaginable in that time.

And as these other scholars, Catherine Holmes and Naomi Standen say, global history did not begin with the European voyage.

Voyages of discovery. It did not start in the 19th century with a great divergence between the West and China.

Now, I should mention here that not everyone agrees with the term or the concept of the global Middle Ages.

Nora Behrend, for example, says as you see up here, global is both too vague and too misleading a term to help conceptualise the Middle Ages.

It is used for too many diverse phenomena. Instead of borrowing and distorting the concept to make it fit.

We should look at the nature and range of both interconnection and separation in our period and create concepts based on our source material.

And another critique of the global Middle Ages is Rebecca D'Souza.

She argues that the global Middle Ages paradigm remains problematically Anglo centric and Eurocentric in the kind of research that it generates,

partly because it has been born in U.S. and European institutions, and partly because the term medieval is itself a Eurocentric term.

When we take a global perspective, it puts pressure on the term Medieval or Middle Ages themselves.

Medieval indicates different periods depending on region and culture.

In Western Europe and in Islamic regions. For example, medieval generally refers to around 500 to around 1500 C.E.

On the other hand, when we talk about old Russian or medieval Russian literature, it can stretch from the 11th to the 17th centuries.

Medieval in a Chinese context could start after the fall of the Han Empire in 220, until the fall of the yuan dynasty in 1368.

So there are all these different time periods that could be defined as medieval,

but what's in particular difficult is that the term medieval itself was coined to describe the European world.

So applying it to other cultures and parts of the world has to be done with care and sensitivity.

We should try, I think, to listen to each culture with sensitivity and use terminology generated and born from particular cultures.

We can also follow Jonathan see in actively as you see up here, disassociating the term medieval from an exclusively European framework.

And I personally find the global Middle Ages a very useful framework from which to help decolonise our readings of medieval literature.

So I will continue to use this concept and term terminology while keeping those criticisms I mentioned in mind.

Okay, let's now move on to part two of the lecture.

Why take the moon as a theme in approaching the global Middle Ages?

Well, I'm a bit biased because I absolutely love the moon and I've been researching it extensively in recent years.

Um, and my research has found in my book The Medieval Moon.

But there are less self-centred reasons for why I've chosen the moon as a theme through which we can think about the global Middle Ages.

It's an obvious point, but seeing or hearing about or otherwise experiencing the moon can be seen as a unifying experience common to most,

if not all, of humanity.

The moon can thus be a great subject for approaching the medieval world holistically, not remaining confined to Eurocentric perspectives.

The moon is also a relevant theme when using the framework of the Global Middle Ages.

Because medieval people were so profoundly interested in the moon and what it could mean to their lives, their dreams, their hopes.

And this has been true throughout history. But we can find particularly medieval interests in the moon, as put by Edgar Williams.

Virtually every well-known writer has something to say about the moon, or has used its characteristics to set the scene,

whether it is a romantic moonlit situation, a ghostly dark, moonless night, or a supernatural full moon.

And poet Carol Ann Duffy has curated a whole anthology of poems about the moon.

And she says that the moon has always been and always will be the supremely prized images for the image for poets.

As we look back to the medieval world, emphasis on the word world, that we can discover exciting stories of lunar adventure.

Of course, since the 20th century, humans have been able to physically travel to the moon.

But imagining travel to and from the moon has been part of our history long before the 1900s.

And we'll look at two examples of stories, from travels to and from the moon in the Middle Ages.

One in English, the other in Japanese.

So part three of the lecture. Starting with the English poem about a man in the moon.

Medieval people throughout Europe insisted that they saw a man in the moon, particularly one carrying a bundle of thorns.

In apparent frustration, the author and thinker Albert of Saxony says he cannot see this man no matter how hard he tries,

which suggests that many other people could, as he says, and you see up here, I do not know what that figure may be,

for I've looked at the moon many times, and I have certainly seen a black spot there, but in no way could I see there such a figure,

as some people say is apparent there, namely the figure of a man having a load of thorns on his back.

So this, this Albert of Saxony couldn't see the man in the moon, but many others could.

English, German and Dutch traditions all have a story of a man who is banished to the moon.

And this seems to have been inspired by a verse in the Bible, in the Book of Numbers, about a man who works on the Sabbath and then is killed.

And it came to pass when the children of Israel were in the wilderness and had found a man gathering sticks on the Sabbath day,

that they brought him to Moses and Aaron and the whole multitude.

And they put him into prison, not knowing what they should do with him.

And the Lord said to Moses, let that man die.

Let all the multitude stone him without the camp. And when they had brought him out, they stoned him, and he died, as the Lord had commanded.

Now in various medieval stories inspired by this biblical narrative, the wretched individual is not killed.

He or she is instead exiled to the moon.

There are many versions of the story in German and Dutch traditions.

In one, the man was guilty of working on a Sunday, akin to the biblical version, with the man working on the Sabbath.

In another there was a man and a woman.

The man was exiled to the moon because he placed thorns on the way to church to prevent people from going to Sunday Mass.

The woman was exiled because she made butter on a Sunday.

In a further version, a man stole vegetables, and in yet another he stole sheep.

There is also a Dutch version in which he is a vegetable stealer.

And there was a further version that said the exile is actually Cain of the Bible.

Cain was forever cursed for having committed the first murder, killing his brother Abel, as detailed in the Bible Genesis four 1 to 16.

And this is found this idea of Cain being on the moon is found in the work of Dante.

Now, the story of an individual exiled to the moon for committing a crime is also found in an English poem from the 1300s,

now known as The Man in the moon. The poem is an example of alliterative verse.

Although this poem dates to the 13th or 14th centuries, alliteration in poetry has much deeper roots from the time of Old English.

Um, as you will know, if you did the if, uh, if you are doing prelims paper two or did prelims Paper two last year,

it reminds us that rhyming was not always the standard for poetry.

Alliteration used to be paramount. Here is a full translation of the poem.

I'll read it out in translation. The man in the moon stands and strides on his forked stick.

He bears his burden of thorns. It's a great wonder that he doesn't fall.

For fear lest he fall. He shudders and meanders.

When the frost freezes, he endures much chill.

The thorns are sharp. They tear his clothes.

There is nobody in the world who knows where he sits.

Nor unless it be the hedge, what clothes he wears.

Which way do you think this man has taken his path?

He has set one foot in front of the other for whatever effort one takes, one never sees him move.

He is the slowest man that was ever born. Where he is in the field, driving in stakes for hope of closing his doors with thorns.

He must, with his Twi bill, make a bundle or all his day's work there is lost.

The same man on high whenever he appears there on the moon where he was born and raised.

He leans on his fork like a grey friar, this hunched idler.

He is sorely frightened. It's many days ago that he was here.

I know he's not succeeded in his errand. He's hewn somewhere a burden of briars.

Therefore, some Heyward has taken his pledge. If your pledge is taken.

Bring home the brushwood. Set forth your other foot.

Stride over the paths. We shall ask the Haywood home to our house and put him at ease most comfortably.

Drink to him affectionately with a very stiff drink, and our sweet wife shall sit by him when he is as drunk as a drowned mouse.

Then we shall take the pledge from the bailiff. This man hears me not, though I cry out to him.

I think the chill is death. The devil tear him apart.

Though I shout up high, he will not hurry. The spiritless lad knows nothing of the law.

Hopeful. Hubert. Magpie in stockings.

I think you are bewildered. Into the moor, though I am so angry with him that my teeth grind.

The chair won't come down before the day dawns.

Okay. And we will go through that poem together to explain it.

But first of all, this English poem is found in a famous collection of lyrics known as the Harley Manuscript.

London, British Library. Ms. Harley. Two.

Two. Five. Three. Matthew Rhys Salmon suggests this poem may have been recited as part of a performance.

And in this version of the story, the man on the moon is guilty of stealing thorns to make a hedge in order to keep livestock from roaming.

The speaker of the poem is viewing the man in the moon and trying to help him.

This poem even tells us the name of the man in the moon.

Hubert. The cunning plan to help you.

But the man in the moon is that the speaker and his wife will distract the Haywood, the legal official, in order to take the pledge.

The penalty for the man in the moon's crime, and thus release the man in the moon from his lunar prison.

But when the man in the moon does not seem to hear him, the speaker grows frustrated with the fellow, cursing him.

May the devil pull him apart. The devil him to draw.

He says. So let's go through it, stanza by stanza now.

The first stanza gives us a glimpse into the miserable life of the man on the moon.

He is afraid of falling off. And he trembles and meanders, shot and shatters.

He experienced his terrible cold and must bear his burden of thorns which continuously prick him.

The speaker wonders how this man of the moon does not fall off, and considers how nobody knows where he rests or what he wears.

So the man in the moon is clearly suffering a terrible exile.

The second stanza shows how the man in the moon is condemned to continual labour.

The third stanza suggests he was born and raised on the moon, which seems to go against the typical story that he was exiled there.

But regardless, the man in the moon does seem entirely trapped there.

He seems to be in prison on the moon. And in this third stanza, the speaker describes the man in the moon as a worn out and burdened figure.

As you see, he refers to him as a Grey Friar.

A Grey Friar refers to those who are part of the Franciscan Order, a religious group who follow the same regulations,

and the Franciscans dressed poverty and came to England around 1224.

So he says that the man in the moon looks so woebegone and worn out that he looks like a Franciscan.

In the fourth stanza, the speaker details the cunning plan to release the man in the moon.

When the legal official in control of the man in the moon's exile is as drunk as a deranged mouse,

as drunk as a drowned mouse, the speaker and the wife will take the pledge, and the man will be free.

But the fifth stanza suggests that even as the speaker is calling out to the man with this plan for securing his freedom,

the lunar exile cannot hear him. The speaker fires out in frustration, is shot.

The chair is death. I think the chill is deaf.

It is this in this stanza where he reveals to us the name of the man in the moon.

Hubert.

The speaker is very annoyed with Hubert, to say the least, and we end with the speaker failing to communicate with that wretched man on the moon.

So as mentioned this. This poem is found in this manuscript.

This is an important trilingual manuscript with texts in English, French and Latin.

There is a wide variety of lyrical poetry in this manuscript.

The collection of poems comprise love lyrics alongside religious lyrics and ones with a sharp political and even satirical edge.

The man in the moon is found in the sixth booklet. The manuscripts, made up of seven and The Man in the moon, is found in the sixth booklet,

and this booklet contains a range of Anglo-Norman or French of England poetry with a humorous bent,

including Chevalier qui Field, the knight who made vaginas talk.

Yet it also at the same time bizarrely contains devotional texts, including A saint's life.

So there's a real range of poetry with which this man in the moon poem is found, and Susanna Green suggests that the audience for booklets six,

in which the man in the moon poem is found, may have comprised young male students,

but also mixed gender social settings at which comic entertainments could be read aloud.

Now the man in the moon is found between two French poems.

Um, and one of them, the one called survival, makes me rhyme and create a story speaks to the man in the moon in compelling ways.

For there too, we have an exiled speaker, not unlike the man exiled cruelly to the moon.

The exiled speaker of this French poem, though, roams in more hospitable terrain, as he says in translation.

That is why I will stay in the woods under the pretty shade, where there is neither treachery nor any bad law.

In the woods of Belgrave, where the jaybird flies.

And the nightingale always sings without pause.

So the English poem and this French poem both deal with themes of exile, and they seem to be in a kind of dialogue.

But thinking more about the English poem itself.

On one level, the poem could be seen as pure comedy.

And in this case, it's an example of classist humour from the Middle Ages.

The poem is perhaps an example of a higher class audience laughing at people of a lower class.

This man in the moon stories primarily circle around this central idea of a Libra being exiled.

So it raises questions about class who were enjoying these stories.

Were they nobility or gentry, laughing at the expense of the lower classes,

like a labourer stealing thorns in order to make a hedge to stop livestock from roaming?

Oh, is the poem actually about Kane the ultimate social reject of history?

The poem also plays with ideas of how the Earth and the moon might connect.

The thwarted communication between speaker and lunar man is clear.

Try as the speaker might, he cannot be heard by Hubert up in the moon prison.

As hard as we try to reach the moon, there remains a barrier.

You may have noticed that the speaker shifts between referring to the man in the moon in the third person and the second person.

He versus you, which suggests, on the one hand, an observation of, yet on the other, a direct address to a direct connection with the man in the moon.

The moon in these stories, like the English poem and the German and Dutch narratives, is a place of harsh exile.

It is where the rejects of the society are thrown out.

The terrain is inhospitable, full of cold and harshness and fear.

Perhaps we all, like the speaker of the English poem, have a desire to save the man or woman in the moon.

Perhaps seeing ourselves in their fate. Imagining the horrors both of living in such a cruel terrain.

And of social rejection. But perhaps the exiles, whether named Hubert.

Or something else, are condemned to never hear us as we call out.

Okay. And now, finally.

Part four of this lecture. We'll move on to a different part of the world to experience another journey to and from the moon.

A Japanese story from the late ninth or early 10th century.

So the high end period known as Tak story Monogatari.

The tale of the Bamboo Cutter. This has been famously adapted into a Studio Ghibli animation that you might have seen.

The Tale of Princess Kaguya. The medieval story on which this film is based.

The tale of the Bamboo Cutter may be the earliest work of fiction in Japanese, of which we know.

This is because The Tale of the Bamboo Cutter is the earliest surviving example of the monogatari, meaning tale or romance, or even novel.

In this story, a moon princess comes to Earth, is raised and nurtured by humans, but must in the end leave and return to her moon dwelling.

The girl is, in a sense, exiled in the opposite direction when compared with the man on the moon we encountered earlier.

She belongs to the moon, but is exiled on Earth for a time.

The story brings us close to the moon, while also reminding us of our distance from it.

Reading The Tale of the Bamboo Cutter. It is as though a piece of the moon comes to sit with us for a while, only to suddenly disappear again.

Scholar Richard Okada suggests a parallel between the style of narration of The tale of the Bamboo Cutter and theatrical performance.

And this is the presence of the moon and renders the sense of a moon princess visiting the Earth all the more palpable.

So the story goes as follows. An old man while cutting bamboo, finds a tiny three inch girl bathed in light.

He takes her home and he and his wife nurture her tenderly, even placing her in a cradle.

A late 17th century illustration, which you can see up here, shows the young girl in a basket being watched and cared for by her parents.

She grows up remarkably quickly under the care of her adoptive parents, bringing them great joy.

She has a palliative effect on those around her.

When the old man felt in poor spirits and was in pain.

Just to look at the child would make the pain stop and his anger would melt away.

The man continues to find gold when cutting bamboo and becomes increasingly wealthy.

They bring a diviner to grant her a name, and she is called Naoko.

Taki Kageyama, shining princess of the bamboo.

As she matures, many men begin to desire her.

But she does not wish to be married. Under pressure from her father.

She says that if she must marry, she desires sincerity.

She sets five suitors. Particular tasks.

Prince. Is it. Is she the Cary must acquire the stone begging bowl of the Buddha.

Prince career.

Mochi must bring a branch of a tree that grows in the mountain of the East and Sea, which has silver roots, gold trunk, and fruits of white jewels.

Albino mama Raji must bring a robe made from Chinese fire.

Rat fur Ottoman a monkey must bring a jewel from a dragon's head, and its owner kami must bring Swallow's easy delivery charm.

Most of the suitors fail in their quests, but attempt to deceive Kagawa Hema, who nonetheless remains un deceived.

Prince is on a kami, dies in the quest.

Through all these adventures, the Emperor has heard of him and summons her.

But Kaikohe refuses the summons. Nevertheless, she and the Emperor strike up a tender friendship and correspond with one another.

Three years pass and we are told that Kaikohe man keeps looking at the moon in downcast spirits, weeping.

Those around her become increasingly concerned for her.

As you see up here at the time of the full moon of the seventh months, she sat outside, seemingly immersed in thought.

Her maidservants informed the bamboo cutter. Kagoshima has always looked sadly at the moon, but her preoccupation of late has not been normal.

There must be something which is deeply worrying her. Please watch her carefully.

When her father asks her what is wrong. She answers.

When I look at the moon, the world seems lonely and sad.

What else should worry me? The old man tells her not to gaze at the moon, but she replies, how could I live without gazing at the moon?

Her sadness continues every time she sees the moon, until she finally reveals what it is that affects her so deeply.

I am not a creature of this world, she says.

I come from the palace of the moon. I visited this world because of an obligation from the past.

Now the time has come for me to return. And on the night of the next full moon, people from my old country will come for me.

Her father is devastated and father and daughter sob uncontrollably.

The old man even says he will try to prevent the moon people from taking her away.

But Kagawa explains. I have a father and mother in the Palace of the moon.

When I came here from my country, I said it would be for just a little while, but I have already spent many years in this land.

I feel no joy now that I am about to return.

But only a terrible sadness. The fateful day of the full moon comes and cake with him.

His adoptive parents and the Emperor decide to resist the moon Commerce.

The cargo behemoth tells them that all resistance would be futile.

Kagoshima then tells her father more about the moon people and how desperate she feels.

She says, weeping. When I used to go and sit outside, I would always beg for just one more year with you.

But my wish was not granted. That was what made me so unhappy.

It breaks my heart to upset you so and then to leave you.

The people of the moon are very beautiful and do not grow old.

They have no worries either. And yet it does not make me happy to be going there.

Instead, I am torn by longing, because I shall not be able to look after you when you are old and decrepit.

So we see that Kagawa has developed a real profound attachment to her earthly parents,

and we, the audience, become entrenched or moved by the terrible separation that is to come.

At last, a magnificent moon troop with a chariot canopied in silk comes to take her away.

All attempts to resist the troop fail and Kaikohe man must be taken.

The king of this moon troupe calls to Kagoshima, asking her, why have you lingered so long in such a filthy place?

Meaning the earth? Kagoshima is forced to leave the earth she loves and return to the moon.

The moon. People bring with them a box with a feather robe and an elixir of immortality.

Once she wears the feather robe, she will forget her temporary home among the loving people on this earth.

She gives the alexia as a gift to the emperor.

And having sent this gift and written a letter to her parents, she wears the robe of sadness and forgets her earthly attachments.

She no longer remembers them, but her parents and the Emperor continue to grieve her.

Now. Scholars have made many links between this story and historical and religious contexts.

Joshua Mosquito observes parallels between the tale of the Bamboo Cutter and others, other sources from early Japanese history.

And as observed by Jonathan Stockdale in the items that the princess requests from her suitors.

The story offers a rich mixture of religious symbolism,

from the begging bowl of the Buddha to the branch of a tree from a Daoist mountain of immortality.

The narrative also critiques male desire and court politics, challenging the highest court and its values.

It is a powerful social narrative, even as it deals with the fantastical subjects of moon creatures and immortality.

Stockdale suggests that the text is profoundly concerned with the concept of exile.

Kaikohe man is exiled from the moon. And this quote provides a context by which the other characters are finally able to place Kageyama.

Whose beauty and radiance, together with her utter contempt for royal commands, had alternately enthralled and unsettled everyone around her.

If I could add to this, I wonder whether the story raises questions about how humans,

too, are suffering a form of exile and might be happier on the moon.

The story suggests that human beings received a radiant,

immensely special princess and then subjected her to the strictures and pettiness of political and social rules.

She is then taken from them as though humanity did not deserve her on this planet, that filthy place, as the Moon King calls it.

Perhaps it also suggests, though, the beauty that can be possible on us, if only at times, and only in fragments.

Tag him as light might be a curative taste of how amazing the world can be.

I think that The Tale of the Bamboo Cutter is not only about the beauty and splendour and enticing wonders of the moon.

It is also about the beauty and joy and tenderness and love to be found on us in all its limited and broken forms.

Much like the English Man in the moon poem, this Japanese prose text is as much about the US as it is about the moon.

So I'll now bring this lecture to a close. Next week we'll be considering medieval women's religious writing in Europe and beyond.

Thank you. Yeah.

