[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
Hello, everyone. Hi. Well, it's good to see so many fresh faces at the start of the academic year.

So I'm Elisa Soju. I'm the department, a lecturer in literature.

I'll be convening this, uh, lecture service, uh, and also giving a few of the lectures.

And so I hope to see you again at that point.

Um, so this lecture service is really a great opportunity for everyone, undergraduate and graduate students,

um, to really venture outside the community in terms of your research and studies.

Um, and this term only, we will be going from.

19th century India to Viking Age Scandinavia, um, from the medieval Islamic empire to early modern England and the Americas.

And so I really hope that, um, you will allow yourself to go beyond what is typically useful to you in terms of papers you need to write,

or assignments you need to fulfil, and really take full advantage of this extraordinary series of lectures.

Um, and for most of you, I guess this will be the first introduction to world literature.

And what is literature? That is a good question. Uh, and I think one that every lecturer here, uh, will answer differently.

Uh, not to speak about the authors they will be lecturing about.

So I think, um, there's no better way to start our lecture series than with, uh,

Rabindranath Tagore, who had his own idiosyncratic idea idea of what literature is.

And one that I hope you will learn to appreciate in all this challenging difference.

So, um, let's discover together two golf worlds.

And let me leave the floor to our lecturer today, Professor Peter McDonald.

Thanks. Thanks for the great. It's really, uh, good to see you all.

Um, sorry. I always begin each lecture that I give, uh, with a little bit of, uh, a detour.

And the detour is to advise you on neuroscientific grounds that in this situation, the absolute best thing you can do is shut your device.

Take out a pen and make some notes on the handout that I've given you.

It's literally the best way that we learn in these situations and record things,

simply because there is a deep neurophysiological connection between writing and the rest of the language systems in your brain.

So simply making the effort of making a few notes, which is all you need.

I've picked the handout with more than we're going to talk about in detail,

but a few notes on some things that you think might be worth remembering in terms of any kind of supplement that I've added to,

uh, the comment that we've had on it. That's the best thing you can do.

And this is one of the many books that have been recently published to justify that argument, that when you when you're in these situations,

using the muscle memory of your hand is the best way to remember things and to note things as you're going along.

So that's unless you desperately need it. I strongly recommend you shut your device, and, uh, we can just take the conversation from there.

Uh, a couple another preliminary thing. Can I just get a sense of who you all are?

Um, uh, how many people are, uh, in their first year, uh, doing English and in some.

So this is, in a sense, keying into prelims paper three if you're into that lingo.

So, uh, probably a bit more than half of you.

How many of you, uh, graduate students? So a good cluster and the rest of you presumably might be somewhere between some finalists.

Maybe. Is that okay? It's great to see you.

I'm. In a sense, I'm pitching this for, uh, those of you doing prelims paper three.

So it's that's that's that's what I'm, uh. I'm who I imagine I'm talking to.

It's one of the key things about the difference between AI and human beings is that we have a model of not only of the world as we speaking,

but we also have a model of our audience, of the addressee. So this is mainly pitched for, uh, prelims paper three.

So, um, we're thinking about.

Rabindranath Tagore as a useful person to have in your repertoire for 19th century, late 19th century into 20th century, uh, literature.

So actually he spans paper three and paper four in prelims terms.

And the big question, of course, is why? Why, at this stage, at the beginning of your.

And another quick question. How many people have heard of Rabindranath Tagore?

Oh, brilliant. For I've given this, given this lecture in the past where there's been two people that's that's at least about ten of you.

That's great. Okay, so for those of you who never heard of him, and I hopefully for those of you who heard of him,

might pick up something that you haven't heard about him. Um, the big question is why?

Why do you want to? Why do you want to? He was a he was going to find he he did many, many things.

But I'm going to give you just two reasons. At the beginning of your undergraduate course.

So why you might want to have. To go permanently there in the background.

Um, and the first has to do with his concept of literature.

And the second has to do with this concept of world literature. So that's what I'm going to focus on in the lectures.

But we just need to remember, and I'm just going to begin very quickly with a quick sketch.

And this is all on the handout. Uh, I'm simply repeating that. But a quick sketch of, uh,

the two things that are always important to remember when you're looking back

to the historical past is that the goals life world was not our life world.

And in terms of, uh, the historical and geopolitical contexts in which he lived, and they weren't simply contexts in which he lived.

They were contexts that harassed him. Into saying and writing the things that he did.

So this is not content to some kind of decorative background.

It's context as a source of harassment, which is what motivates.

A lot of. Writers. Um. Historically.

The key thing, of course, is you just notice those dates that I've put in orange.

Born in 1861, in what was then called Calcutta and now Calcutta in British India.

So just notice that in 1858, just three years before is born, India gets handed over to the British crown,

and you get the beginnings of what you can really call the British Empire in the Indian subcontinent.

The British have been there as the East India Company since the late 18th century, but it's.

This is Tagore's world. First world. It's the it's the empire in that context.

But you also notice that he dies in 1941, so he dies six years before India.

And of course, if some of you, I'm sure know a little bit about India's traumatic independence history,

but also Pakistan, East Pakistan, which becomes West Bengal. That all happens after he dies.

1941. So it's 1861 to 1941. He's lived a long life.

We also notice a couple of other things. Controversial thing in terms of the English, uh, uh, subject, uh, English as a discipline in Oxford.

Uh, you know, what's to go on?

English poet will know he wrote in Bangla, mainly Bengali, Bangla, uh, but he also self translated and he also wrote in English.

So he's a perfectly legitimate person to include on your course.

We're going to see this problems with some of his self translations, but they're all there.

But a number of other quick things about him just to notice from this is that he was the first,

uh, writer from outside of Europe to win the Nobel Prize in 1913.

And he hung about Oxford quite a bit. Um, but he also was an incredible.

He was a polymath, and he founded a university bishop, as you can see, in 1921.

Uh, and also school and various other things. So historically, that's where we are.

His life is absolutely embedded in the parentheses of High Empire, 1861 to 1941.

Also, his India is nothing like the Indian subcontinent that we now see on Google Maps.

His India looked like for some reason imperial cartographers just loved pink.

Um, but you can see that his India was an extremely complex tapestry of different sorts of political entities,

with the pink being the core, uh, territories of the British Empire, of the British Raj.

And the arrow points to where Calcutta and Calcutta in Bengal, which now spans, uh, West Bengal, the province of West Bengal and um, Bangladesh.

Uh, that's where to go was born, and that's where he was based.

Um, so that was his India. Uh, if you look at it now, it's of course, very different.

Uh, it's a much more, uh, we've got the independent nation states of Bangladesh, India, Pakistan.

So very different place. Okay. So the big question is why do we want to look at him?

The the thing that I want to focus on is, uh.

This is, uh, just a, um, a little excerpt of giving you more of it from the, uh, oration that the Oxford.

Uh, uh, I've yet to find out exactly who that figure is, but the Oxford, uh, academic professor who, uh, conferred on him the honorary degree in 1940.

So just before he died in Shantiniketan, where he lived in Calcutta, it was the war.

So he could he didn't travel. He was very old, but they came and awarded him the degree.

And this is part of the statement translated from the Latin, because, of course, Oxford honorary degrees were then and often are given in Latin.

And this is what they said at the end. Here before you is the myriad minded.

I think that's a really worth useful adjective to think about. Myriad minded poet and writer, the musician famous in his art,

the philosopher proven both in word and deed, the fervent upholder of learning and sound doctrine,

the ardent defender of public liberties, free speech, one who had by the sanctity of his life and character,

has by the sanctity of living God, has won for himself the praise of all mankind.

So they gave that. It's part of the oration, the speech, uh, for him,

getting the Oxford honorary doctorate in 1940 is given in Latin to go being to go replied in Sanskrit.

Uh, as opposed to bungalow. So he said, okay, you've got Latin, we've got Sanskrit.

The only thing missing from that repertoire of music philosopher, poet, uh, educator,

civil rights activist, etc., etc. the only thing missing is the fact that he was also a painter.

Um. And this gives you an idea. These are all self-portraits.

An idea of how to go placed himself in a modernist context, in a very angular, specific sort of way.

Um, I recommend that you Google his paintings to have a look at them.

Okay, so he did all those things he spends.

Well, he is a polymath. Is is the simplest way of describing him.

Um, and he really was one of the most influential, uh, figures intellectually, certainly from the, you know.

You know, he gets the Nobel Prize in 1913 that just rockets him into global fame for the rest of his life.

I mean, he is the. He travels the world extensively.

He's deeply connected. So that aspect of the world of Tagore's world is simply generated by the fame that he got from the Nobel Prize,

but he becomes one of the leading entities. He's a great interlocutor with Gandhi.

He's as fervently anti-colonial as Gandhi, but he's also always intellectually engaged with everybody, including the British.

Um, which which is one of the things that always makes me never,

ever wants to cut himself off culturally and intellectually from anything, despite the politics and economics of empire which he deplored.

But the reason why I think he's worth hanging on to and focusing on and remembering today.

Uh, is that he represents an intellectual tradition which, uh, in many respects, the Western tradition takes decades to catch up with.

And it's partly because of where he's coming from. He's informed by Indian intellectual traditions, reading high cultural things like the Vedas.

He's massively informed by popular folk songs and nursery rhymes, uh, with the vowel ba ul uh tradition.

He's engaged. He's engaged with Zen Buddhism. He's a whole series of things, but he's also engaged with Western philosophical thought,

scientific thought in all sorts of ways, never anti-science, uh, as Gandhi took that position at some points.

But, uh, but Tagore was never that. But for this, uh, what I've given on the handout, I've given you the complete essay of 1889,

it's really important to notice that date, 1889, he writes an essay in his family magazine called literature.

And it begins with this sentence. The essence of literature does not allow itself to be trapped within a definition.

The essence of literature. Does not allow itself to be trapped within a definition.

That idea that there might be something that is uncontainable in the creativity with language that he was trying to represent and achieve as a poet,

that that resists definition. In the in the Euro-American tradition.

It really takes the French up until about. And by the 1950s, probably the first person is blown.

Marie's blown show in the 1950s to reach that position, to recognise that.

What's interesting about literature is that any attempt by a critic, a writer, a theorist,

let alone a scholar or an academic to set some boundaries and define what this is.

To answer the question what is literature is going to fail and be defeated by the creative practice of the writers themselves?

So there's something paradoxical and interesting about this phenomenon that it is both something

we can point to and something we can never quite contain within any definitional terms.

As soon as you have a definition, somebody will write something that will defeat that definition.

And that is absolutely true of the history of literature.

And one of the reasons what it's interesting to engage with it.

But the goal gets there in 1889. The French get there in the 1950s and the Anglo-Americans get there in the 1970s.

Catching up with that debate. The what is literature debate?

So that's the first reason to think about the goal.

He's he's challenging that definition.

If you like scholastic assumption that we can know what this is.

Define it once and for all and contain it. He's challenging that and recognising that in 1889.

I've included the rest of the essay on the handout, which I also recommend you have.

Have a look at. Uh, simply because in that same essay, the literature essay, there's some really interesting articulations,

particularly with a distinction between construction, which is a deliberate act of kind of self-editing.

Scrutiny of your own work and creation, which is not as conscious and not.

Not something you're fully in control of in terms of authorship and understanding.

Creativity. He's got some very, very interesting formulations in the same essay about that.

So it's a really important statement from the late 19th century about authorship and creativity in language.

That's another good reason for making sure that that essay is part of your repertoire.

But the main thing I want to focus on today is the related.

You're going to see if he thinks that about literature, then we're going to be not too surprised that he thinks the same thing.

When you add an adjective like world literature to it, but we're going to have to get through a couple of thickets.

Of, uh, various tangled things to get to that point.

So the main thing I'm going to focus on now for the rest of the lecture is his.

Concept, non concept and concept of world literature.

And that's as we start to think about this with, uh, thinking about what was happening here in his lifetime.

And the subject that those of you who've embarked on as undergraduates, um.

Uh, the BA in English language and literature started in 1894.

So it's a it's an it's a young upstart subject. In the Oxford context.

English literature and language. But when it started, it started in the shadow of the classics and the classics.

That's Latin and Greek literature, philosophy, history, everything that they studied in little,

humble, little humanity, or as the more humane letters, as it was called in Oxford.

Everything, uh. The kind of ethos which came from Aristotle about that was, well, great classical literature.

You know. The great Homer, the the play of the Sophocles, etc. of the play, the play, the playwrights, the poets.

In the positive version of that from Aristotle was they somehow gave you access to universal truth.

There was a universal truth that this the universal, was embodied in the great poet and playwright in the late 19th century.

They said, well, so we've been studying classics at Oxford, Latin and Greek.

We now need to start studying our own language and literature.

And the reason why you need to do that is Aristotle did not understand that there's the law of the universal truth,

but there's also the law of national character.

This is a great 19th century obsession. It's not an obsession that we've entirely left behind.

But it was. What? The fun. And here is a man called William.

John caught up. And he was the Oxford Professor of Poetry.

Look at the dates from 1895 to 1900.

So, in other words, just as the subject is starting and he knows that and he's giving a rationale, his lectures are fascinating to read.

If you're interested in the early, the late late 19th century origins of the subject.

Those lectures are worth reading in terms of how he thought.

But this is what he says besides the law of the universal noted by Aristotle, which we're just reading, talking about,

we have to recognise the existence of another law,

the operation of which Aristotle himself did not observe and indeed had no opportunity of observing.

In Greek, uh, city states the law of national character.

By this I mean the social instinct which compels the artist unconsciously to individualise his idea of the universal in the light of.

The race tendencies allow them. The 19th century ambiguity as to whether that's race in some biological concept or simply a synonym for nation.

But race tendencies, the methods of education, the political history, and the character of the nation to which he belongs.

So what happens is you've got this universal truth in poetry and literature.

The classics give you access to that? Allegedly. And now English literature gives you access to the English national character.

But it's the way that that universal humanness is refracted through the language and its literatures,

and also how people are taught how what the character of the nation is.

This is a is a. Built into the foundations of your subject.

The, the, uh, uh, uh, literature in Oxford was only successfully nationalised because those assumptions were removed in 2012.

So from 1894 to 2012, the law of national Character cast a long shadow over the development of this subject,

not only in Oxford in most places around the world. So we now have a post-national conception.

It's one of the reasons why we're interested in the history of world literature that was dominant,

mainstream 19th century thinking across Europe and America.

Uh, it was, uh, certainly what quarto is voicing is a standard view.

But. Partly actually in many ways that you will see because of this substantially because of the engagement with Indian poetic,

religious, philosophical traditions in the late 18th century.

So this is William Jones. And it's also associated particularly with the vehement critique that Edward

Sayeed articulated in his famous and wonderful book called Orientalism from 1978.

It's a critique of that. But at that moment they're also engaging with the Sanskrit traditions, the language.

It's the moment at which the recognition that there's an Indo-European language group, that English is connected to Sanskrit.

Historically, those arguments are being made. These are in the late 18th century, the beginning of 19th century.

And German thinkers. French thinkers, English thinkers are engaging with and discovering this new language and these new traditions.

And they are engaging and they're absorbing everybody, as you'll see in the next quote starts with Gerta, I'm not going to read this out.

So I've just put this in to remind you that actually Schlegel gets there earlier.

So this is 1808 Schlegel is saying. We need to engage with these traditions,

and we also need to recognise that there's a larger system of languages and literatures that any kind of limited to one language,

Germans say, or one nation. In those terms, we need to engage with it.

But the most famous statement, which you will see if you ever open any book on world literature where they'll inevitably start,

is they'll start with this pronouncement by Gerta. From 1827.

This is in a letter to Ackerman from January 1827.

He says, I am more and more convinced that poetry is the universal possession of mankind,

revealing itself everywhere and at all times, in hundreds and hundreds of men.

You've got to forgive the German, but also the time, uh, in terms of the gender specifics of that.

I therefore like to look about me in foreign nations and advise everyone to do the same.

And this is the famous. Kind of pithy aphorism that everybody quotes.

National literature is now a rather unmeaning term the epoch of world literature, world literature who is at hand?

And everyone must strive to hasten its approach. That's good too.

In 1827. Remember? Caught up in 1894.

You just not engaging with us at all? It's about national character.

We must celebrate the national liberation. Good thing. No.

The next most famous pronouncement that comes in this articulation I've given you is from Marx and Engels and the Communist Manifesto,

where they are talking about and this is also really interesting document to have a look at in terms of this history,

because they're talking about that's often, you know, you think The Communist Manifesto is all about the proletarian revolution.

It's the workers of the world must unite. But actually it spends its early parts talking about the bourgeois revolution.

What the bourgeoisie have done transformed the world through commerce and trade and economically and all sorts of way.

And the bourgeoisie are shown to be initially the revolutionaries.

And this is where they saying this is what's happened. The bourgeoisie have done this, and they've done this in intellectual life as well.

And this is the statement that everybody will quote also from the Communist Manifesto.

This is Marx and Engels. So only translated into English in 1888, but it's from 1848.

The intellectual creations of individual nations become common property in this new

bourgeois world order that's been created through capitalist expansion and so on.

National one sidedness and narrow mindedness become more and more impossible.

And from the numerous national and local literatures kind of interesting distinction that he makes national in literature,

there arises a world literature.

So Marx and Engels in 1848 are saying that world literature emerges from the bourgeois

revolution of the late 18th and early 19th century that is linked to capitalism.

Different for you to get a good has got a much more philosophical, idealised, if you like,

conception of what it is they are talking about economic and political factors driving this move towards world literature.

But you can see that they all start with a notion of the the national.

The national is still there. And it's still a driving force.

But the world is emerging. To go is worth looking at.

And his his the key, uh, um, context for him is from 1907, his essay called World Images, which actually started off as a talk in 1907.

But in order to get to that, we have to get through the way.

This talk. And this is something to think about in terms of all your work.

This is somebody wanting to make an argument in an essay, whether in an exam context or a, um, you.

A dissertation project or something. One of the things you can do is you can simply say, okay, let let me,

let me do some work on how this essay and these statements by Tagore have been translated and how they've been curated,

how they've been presented to us. So this is one of the leading American proponents of the latest version of, uh, world literature, David Damrosch.

And it's a kind of useful, um, you know, textbook, uh, um, collection of important documents and essays about world literature from from 20, uh, 14.

And this is what he says about the Tagore essay. And just just wanted to.

This is how he frames it.

In his 1907 essay World Literature, Tagore advocates searching for, and then he quotes in English the eternal and universal man in literature.

To some extent really interesting. Little hedge.

To some extent following greatest notion of world literature.

Tagore turns it into new purposes in colonial India.

India. Opposing both a narrow minded nationalism and the British policy of dividing and conquering India's many regions and cultures.

So he's turning it into a political concept in the context of empire.

His world literature is a means to move beyond national boundaries,

to integrate humanity within a universal spirit of culture through the power of imagination.

That's how he frames it. In a slightly more critical spirit.

Feng Chia in a new book called What Is the world from 2016.

Kind of kind of rehearses the same arguments and the same views,

but in a more edgy critical spirit against recent series of literature says thank you in 2016, I have proposed.

So he's talking about his own a normative conception. Uh, given.

Two goals views on literature and defining it. We got to hesitate at normative conceptions.

Somebody is fixing a moment of conception. But anyway,

I have proposed a normative conception that does not simply revive the older vision of world departure as the expression of universal humanity.

So this is the older vision. He's now proposing a new concept of World Vision, and it's replacing the old one,

that vision, the old one, which received its canonical articulation by gutter.

There we go. And which I have described as spiritualist, is not confined to the West.

Here is Rabindranath Tagore description of how worlds which gives us access to humanity's eternal ideals.

Okay. So this is again you notice how he's being presented.

He's being presented as some kind of eastern mystic who gives us access to some universal truth about humanity.

So he sounds a little bit like Aristotle's version of the great poets and playwrights of the classical era.

You're getting access to the universal through. This is what they make to go sound like.

The difficulty here is partly to start with translation.

And the only until very recently, this.

If there's now a couple of other translations out there, I'm going to give you one handcrafted one in a moment.

The only translation, the first translation of the World Literature essay into English was from 2001.

And this is what the. Key statement is towards the end.

This is the goal in the 2001 translation.

It is time. We pledged that our goal is to view universal humanity in universal literature by freeing ourselves from rustic and catholicity.

That we shall recognise a totality in each particular author's work.

And that it in this totality we shall perceive the interrelations among all.

Human efforts at expression. That's the 2001 translation.

I think once you see that and read that translation alongside the framings that Damrosch and Feng Chia give it, you'll understand why they do that.

So again, I think we need to think a little bit more carefully about how this is all framed.

And to get at more sharply what Tagore was doing with the concepts of world literature.

Something worth remembering is that he was asked.

He was talking in Bangla in 1907, and he was talking to a group of Indian scholars in Calcutta, and he was.

Being asked to think about and talk about comparative literature as a concept.

So his and his conception of world pressure is pushing back against any notion of comparative literature.

So that's part of the immediate context that he's working with.

So he's, he's he's counter to is anti world literature. Damrosch.

Uh, I'll, I'll, I might as well just say it. But between you and me, uh,

Damrosch is creating a version of world of in the US context because of what's happening in American universities

of in in the last 20 years to find a way for comparative literature to survive as a reformed world literature.

Partly because it means that you can read anything in translation.

But to go is articulating a version of a world of torture which is against comparative literature.

It's of course, also against national literatures, as we'll see.

So if we start to. Pick through and go back and re translate.

And this is a translation not yet published. Uh or it is in some of her articles and essays by a real thinker, Chaudhary from 2018,

a re translation of this essay and the concluding part of this essay.

The most important thing. A metaphor that he uses at the conclusion to this essay.

And this is why you'll see the anti national literature, but also anti comparative literature is, he says, the world in his concept.

And he uses this metaphor. It says it's not your ploughed field plus my ploughed field.

So this is this additive conception of world of [INAUDIBLE]. Well well when we're studying world literature we will study French literature,

we will study German literature, we will study, uh, well, Indian literature.

Uh, okay. So, uh. Hindi literature Bengali literature.

How do we start to define it once we get into a multilingual context?

But he's saying immediately this metaphor of the ploughed fields, that's, that's he's rejecting that.

So the world, another issue of Tagore's world, one of the other worlds,

the world does not mean this additive, cumulative conception of various ploughed fields.

Instead, he says, and this is the re translation of the 2001 translation that I just read.

He says this the time has come. 1987.

The time has come to try to free ourselves from narrow parochialism.

And to aim to see. The world, man.

So this is a specific bungler concept that he's developing.

Bishop Manu. The world. Man within the world of literature.

To find in the works of particular writers.

Not a totality, but a whole. And in that whole.

The interrelations among all forms of human expression.

So this is something you can go away to over think about.

But I'll just try to clarify a little bit about what we're dealing with here.

One of the key things that we need to get a sense of is he's balancing.

First of all, a unique Bangla concept.

Of world man, which comes from various intellectual traditions.

It's not universal brotherhood of mankind.

It's not the United Nations. Because that's one ploughed field plus another ploughed field.

Instead, it is in each work. Not only in each writer, but in each work.

You will see some effort, some manifestation of an interconnectedness that is being achieved in and through that work.

And this is an ongoing, never finished project.

But in other words, every single work and every writer worth taking seriously in this way is establishing a version of the world.

In and through the resources they use, the languages they use, the way they write.

So the world is being created at every instance in every work.

There is no. Out there platonic, fixed, defined, already existent notion of world literature.

There's only what you are encountering in this work at that moment,

and what that writer achieved in that work at that moment, to both embed themselves in their world and open that world up.

So in other words, it's something that we can come back to and need to come back to in every act of writing and reading.

Is what to go is starting to look at. And one of the reasons for this is that.

A huge influence on his work and on his thinking, and it's quoted in the essay in various ways.

And I'm always amazed by this. The fact is, the medieval Indian poet.

He's it's part of a bhakti tradition, which is a.

A folk tradition? Partly. It's often street poetry.

Street song. But a medieval political candidates.

This candidate was articulating these sorts of thoughts and observations at the same time that Chaucer was writing The Canterbury Tales.

And this this particular verse from Chandler's medieval verse.

Absolutely. To go just internalise this.

As part of his vision of the world. And it is this I have made the world my home.

And my home, the world. To go wrote a novel called home in the world, um, at the turn of the century as well.

I have made the world my home and my home the world.

And this is also vital for Tagore, even in the context of empire.

The next two lines I have made others.

My own people and my own people.

Others. This is the kind of endless act of opening up that the gore is trying to think about.

And in his own writing, performing at every instance, opening up.

Indian traditions, to English language traditions, to French traditions, but also in ways that are idiosyncratic, unpredictable.

Not my proud field, plus your ploughed field. It's a constant opening up and reworking and reprocessing of these different intersecting traditions.

And that's in the. So that poem is to go.

One of the things that makes the work extremely difficult to translate, and extremely difficult to read,

is that he is constantly and unconsciously quoting at the same time as he's saying what he's saying.

And so there's buried quotations. And this is, this is from the from the the world's literature essay, which is the first translated.

It is nothing but knowing others as our own and ourselves as other,

which in 2018 resync retranslated resync Cotati translated it is when we know the other as ourself and the self as other.

This is the kind of creative productivity that the girl is talking about.

So the key thing about this is that it is a never defined.

And never finished creative project.

So in answer to the question, what is world literature? The goal is not going to point you to a clear final definition of any kind.

Much as literature escapes any definition, so world literature will escape any definition.

The. Um. How are we doing?

Yeah, we need to. The last thing I'll just add is if you want,

if you want to look at a contemporary context in which to go with legacy is being reworked and rethought in all of the fascinating,

incredibly interesting ways, uh, the contemporary, uh, Indian writer, musician, um, Amit Chowdhary, who you can see here, um.

Uh, is the person to look at and to go to for thinking through to goals legacy today.

And this is from a, uh, um, a collection of his essays from 2018 called The Origins of Dislike,

where he describes, I think very well this further aspect of To Go and the world.

And this is worth remembering all those legacies.

Damrosch sent you the translations, and certainly the way to go was understood and read,

uh, in the early 20th century, in the European and American context,

the idea that he is some sort of transcendentalist eastern mystic,

Tagore is a complex figure because he he wasn't averse to playing up to that role, but actually the very profound, deep philosophical sense.

He's absolutely opposed to that. And this is how Chaudhry articulates that in 2018.

This embrace of life, says Chowdhury.

This embrace of life, of chance, of play.

These are all key concepts for Tagore. All of them.

In children's work, you'll see coming from specific Bangla translations.

Of chance of play makes the goals stand out in the intellectual and moral ethos of late romanticism and modernism.

He's thinking here late romanticism, modernism in the European context.

An ethos with which Tagore shares several obsessions.

So he shares several obsessions with this late romantic modernist ethos.

And then he lists time, memory, the moment, the nature of reality, poetic form and so on.

Those are the obsessions of modern he. He shares some of these interests and obsessions.

But whose metaphysics? Says Chaudhry.

He constantly refutes. By metaphysics.

Seshadri. I mean a system whereby value and meaning have their source elsewhere, somewhere beyond the experienced world.

So whenever Togo is talking about these things that escape our conceptualisations,

these things that are easily read as transcendent as somehow beyond the world of experience,

which is a very, very standard way of understanding him in the European and American tradition.

It's exactly the opposite. It is about the experience of the world that we have yet to contain, and yet to define.

What's coming in is a constant renewal and a constant challenge to develop,

and a language and a way of articulating what it is that we're encountering.

And it is. This is the final aspect of the goals world.

It is this world. It's not some other world.

But it's not this world as we encounter it now.

It's this world as we're going to remake it through a constant process of encountering what we don't yet understand and don't yet know.

So that's where the renew is coming. And he saw that as his job as a poet is to constantly pursue that.

So that world, Ben, that he's pursuing that idea is part of that.

What exceeds us at this point. I think I'm going to.

Have to wrap things up fairly. Uh.

Shortly, but, uh, uh, but we could.

I could leave a little bit of time if anybody's got any questions.

I'm also happy to hang about, um, at the end, but I'll just quickly point you to the two other things that I've,

um, I've added on your handout, which you can just.

I'm not going to go through this in any great detail. Um, but, uh, this just to give you an idea.

So this is, uh, from, uh, the, uh, Gitanjali, um, it's Kentucky, Clarissa Dyson's 2010 translation,

uh, which is probably the best English translation to go to for Tagore's poetry now.

Uh, but this is from the Gitanjali the Song Offerings collection, which is his version of that he collected from various sources.

One in the Nobel Prize in 20, in 1913. But this is from the Bangla 1910 edition, which didn't make it to the English language one that he created.

But it's the clearest articulation I think I can find, uh, of him.

Uh. Being in this world, but imagining something else that is yet to come.

So and he will. This is why he uses the language of religiosity.

But it's a language of mediocrity that just escapes simple distinctions between the secular and the pious, the sacred and profane.

Gentle in this hallowed place. Wake up, O my mind, on this seashore.

So it's again locally specified. This is where I am in time and space on this sea shore of India's.

And then what is immediately doing? Grand concourse of humankind.

So this is again. I'm here in this. I'm never denying my locality.

I'm exactly in this time and space. But it is opening up this world to a much greater flow, which is oceanic.

Here I stand and stretch my arms, saluting.

And then you get it. The universal man is the God in man.

In grand with great delight. I praise him as best I can.

So this is again the aspiration to something that is not beyond the human, but it's the I, an ideal,

a constant aspiration, never finished project that he's committed to bringing into being.

And you can see he then goes through and it becomes more and more political as you go on.

He understands if you're going to read the poem, but he's again, he's imagining not only that, you will bring together this kind of.

Local context of me on this seashore, connecting to humanity in large, but also connecting with everything the multi, the multilingual, the multi.

Cultural aspects of India. The final thing that I've put on your handout is, uh, again,

just to flip things around the other way and instead of looking at the goal and the goal certainly read Matthew Arnold.

Uh, but you can also look at Matthew Arnold and, uh.

Who was absolutely engaging with the Indian, uh, poetic traditions.

Gives you a new conception of Matthew Arnold and the classics in the middle of the 19th century.

Very close reader of the new translations of the Bhagavad Gita in particular.

Matthew Arnold um. Vital to his conception of himself as a poet.

Um, for those of you studying American literature in the 19th century.

Thoreau's Walden. And Thoreau is the go to figure for.

In particular, um. Uh, engaging with Indian philosophical and poetic traditions.

Um, so you can, you can flip it around and, uh, look at look at how they're engaging with what use they're making of it, how they, uh.

Understanding and interpreting it. Great. Okay. It's, uh, I will I will end there.

If anybody has any questions, you're welcome to ask.

Uh, if there's any kind of clarification or you can, I will hang about.

For five minutes or so. Otherwise. I hope you make good use of the goal from now on.

Thanks. Are you in the gym?

