[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
Thank you for coming back. Um, Mr.

Is not too many people the most appetising of topics covered in first year or indeed any set of lectures in English,

but it's a good, nutritious topic, like a green smoothie or something.

Um, so how do you get the benefit of coming to these lectures?

This is the last one. Um, so we talked in the second lecture about lines.

Um, about lines as poetry's definition as its constituent.

Um, I quoted rice, Charles Hartman, he says verse is language in lines.

Um, and in the second half of the second lecture. And then last time we looked at some of the different types of line in English poetry.

So it was repeated, if you remember the humbug making video, trying to emphasise that and I am back line say,

is not just a chopped random um or, but merely by number, somewhere in an undifferentiated kind of series of binaries, 010 ones.

Um, I said instead that iambic pentameter, say, allows you to do different kinds of things,

to organise different kinds of thought from Arabic tetra ometer.

Um, as a houseman noted in a famous footnote to his 1933 lecture, the name and nature of Poetry, even rhyme functions differently in pentameter.

And. He says it's a puzzle. Well, what? Why?

Well, blank verse can be written in lines of 10 or 6 syllables, a series of octo syllables.

So dramatis ceases to be verse if they're not rhymed last time.

Other metres that you've more different in the kinds of syntactic structures that they encourage your character traumatic.

For example, we looked at its propensity to imperatives go and catch a falling star and dance song lay your sleeping head, my love.

Auden's 20th century poem lullaby, Plenty of Others, Milton, Hasty Nymph and bring with the jest and youthful jollity, um,

imperatives and also tendency to zoom from painstakingly enumerated specific situations to general rules or laws about human behaviour.

So one way to think about lines, and the first way is as a compositional constraint to kind of pace make of the poem

shaping the length and complexity of words and international phrases and sentences.

The line length shapes all work and say, uh, but there's also a second way to think about lines.

And that's I want to begin today. Um, so instead of focusing on the line as a way of doing the kind of poetic thinking that verse allows,

we can think of it instead from a page or book based perspective, as a secondary kind of punctuation.

You see? I'm not sure. So, yeah, you can probably read that. Um. The image at the top of this introductory slide says Composing Stick.

Um, this is traditional letterpress printing. You can see that the type is being set up in in lines.

Um, so pros in this system is. Writings, language, or the person who chooses how many words to put on the line is the compositor.

Poetry. In almost all cases, I mean the only only questionable cases will be present.

The lines are very, very long and the pages very small. In poetry, the compositor has nothing to do except set the lines as the write them.

Um. I said in the first section that the word meta comes from the Greek word for line.

So I think it's interesting that at that point in literary history, Metron.

Um, measure. Simply means a unit of something.

There's no visual aspect to it. Particularly, it might be a musical phrase, but the word verse comes from the Latin word verses.

Um, and she was some of, you know, that means a turn.

It's used in Latin to refer, for example, to the turning of a plough at the end of a furrow.

Um, so implicit, I suppose that in the Latin word verses is some idea of the poem is a written object, if not yet a printed one.

The poet's hand, like the plough, reaches its limit at some preordained point, the end of the page, and turns backwards.

I mean, in English we don't actually write, obviously the second line in reverse, but it turns backwards the starting and goes again.

Um, in English, the word line, according to the OED, at any rate, is first found to refer to poetry in the late 16th century.

So after the invention of printing, Gutenberg's invention, um, which is casting individual letters from,

from metal, you know, some sort of alloy Latin into a mould and then arranging them by hand.

Like this. The compositor has to pick out each letter, um, this is an ink and pressed onto the paper.

And even the space between the lines, um, is something that the compositor would have to create, um, separating them by strip of LED.

Okay. So we have the line, this unit of thought we've talked about that. And the line is material instantiation on the page.

Um, now often these two things are one and the same. Um, so that the line that the letter press printer sets is a complete thought.

Um, we have definitely seen lots of examples of that.

The couplets that Shakespeare adds, um, to close a scene emphatically like a cut in for his plays.

The couplets at the end of the sonnet several times. Um, so long as men can breathe or eyes can see a complete iambic pentameter.

Complete thought. So long live this, and this gives life to the same.

Also the various lines I was reading out last time, um, with reference to Hugh Khanna's essay um,

Pope's Reasonable Rhymes with the rhyme caps with a flourish, thoughts that are complete an entire in themselves.

But soon the sun with mild arrays descends to the cool ocean.

Where his journey ends. Um, so I guess immediately becomes clear this is what we ended last time.

Has the choice of why fitting the phrases and sentences into the lines or offsetting them in some way.

Um, put it another way, they can choose to work in lines of different lengths relative to the kinds of sentences or phrases he or she wants to write.

So there are a few different possibilities for the liners either fitted to or offset from the sense either short or long relative to its sentences.

And its very rich, say, the end of the poem. Um.

The Italian philosopher Giorgio Agamben begins by quoting one of Paul Valerie's many aphorisms, from a prolonged hesitation between sound and sense.

So Agamben then goes on to talk about the opposition between sound and sense, between metrical segmentation so lines and syntactic segmentation.

So full stops suggesting the argument may in fact be, he says, the only certain distinctive criterion for poetry as opposed to prose.

What does he mean by that? Well, if in poetry you're adding in on top of the normal rules of phrase and sentence making rules,

which, as we saw in the first lecture, require the speaker to do something with the voice.

Um, at the end of a phrase, and even more strongly at the end of a sentence to to pronounce the nuclear stress.

Um, then you're creating the possibility that these two methods of using the voice of to create pause,

to create nuclear stress, one of the end of the line or the end of the sentence either coincide or or diverge.

And of course, it isn't, in fact, only a feeling of a thought run past its natural limit.

Um, that's unique to poetry, but also its opposite, a thought that ends abruptly too soon.

There's no way to do that in prose.

Um, we might begin by seeing how this works in a free verse from one that I mentioned very briefly in the second lecture.

So it is a poem of the Great Depression to a poor old woman, um,

William Carlos Williams, who is still often writing in the early years of a free verse,

um explores the subtle meaning of alternative interactions between the line unit and the syntactic unit,

investigating the pitch contour of the single phrase. They taste good to her with the rigour of an experimentalist.

So first of all, we get the version with a sense and sound coincide to a poor old woman munching a plum on the street,

a paper bag of them in her hand. They taste good to her.

That's the complete phrase occupies the complete line. Then we get the verb and its argument separate from the adjunct.

That's good.

A truth, I suppose, could be regarded as objective, and a truth that, in its objectivity, would then disregard the poor old woman's discovery of it.

That's one line. And to her is the next push over the break.

Finally placing most emphasis on the agent, at least on the bag of plums we get, they taste, and then a blank space.

And the phrase good to her, occupying a line of its own, is deferred, almost as if the question is left hanging.

I think by that time, of course, would you know what the answer is likely to be? So. So what is Williams doing?

I think what he's trying to do is to pay attention to the poor old woman.

Um, moving away from the. No. It's all easy assumption.

They taste good to her because in general, plums taste good to people.

These are nice plums. So does the subtle modification which makes her act of perception, um, of ultimate importance.

So there are lots of readings of, um, Williams reading this poem.

The in general, if you haven't looked at the UPN sound archive is really useful, especially from American poets, from mid-century American poets.

Um, they have, and I'm sure that you could find all this, too. But there are five recordings of Williams reading the poetry 1942 and 1955.

Um, I think the recordings are very consistent. Um, he doesn't necessarily read the poem as I would read it, where I would expect him to read it.

So I'll play you the 1942 one. Um, that's a recording for the National Council of Teachers of, of English.

Um, and then the 1955 one, which was at um, reading at Harvard.

Come. Could you hear any difference between this?

Something slightly different, I think is happening at the nine ending.

And we talked before in the first lecture about how difficult, um,

noun and adjective pairs or double adjective pairs can be in English because there's a glimmer often between the nuclear stress accents.

I talked about Keats's um, to hide the green hill in an April shroud,

where the meta seems to be wanting us to say it like Thornhill Thornhill Park around Greenhill.

Um, this half sucked again. I think the voices hesitated, though.

In the second version it's much more like a compound half sock and putting much more emphasis on the end of the previous line.

Um. Either way.

Um, they are otherwise remarkably consistent. He puts a lot of emphasis on this word.

Good, doesn't he? Um, but by altering the radiation and therefore the places where the pause happens, he vocalises it differently in each repetition.

Um, to be more formal about this question of the way that syntax units interact with metrical units.

Um, we might think about this as a kind of two by two matrix.

Um, so the first version of Williams's line,

the one where the whole phrase occupies a line and occupies it alone, has no obvious notion one is a zero.

Um, but the relentless desire to stress the word good so that to be the the high point of the sentence seems to create a problem.

The chosen phrase, in other words, doesn't fully obey the normal nuclear stress rule in which the final element,

the last thing in the sentence, receives maximal stress.

We didn't say so. They taste good too, huh?

We don't do that unless we're doing sort of focal stress, where we're trying to pick out the woman and differentiate her from another taster.

Um. So because the maximal stress, in fact, in any normal pronunciation of the phrase falls on good,

it's the second animation, the one with the apparent almost, uh, um,

that coincides better with Williams's and I think our natural pronunciation,

what would've happened in traditional verse, um, and is I do want to do that again.

Well, traditional new writers tended either to do what Williams does here, throwing the little prepositional phrase across the line,

break, um, or to move around the order of the words to avoid ending a line like this.

So, as an example of the.

First of all, you see the two examples on the next slide in First in Paradise Lost and Satan is asking how he should appear to Adam.

But but Adam, in what? So shall I appear?

Shall I to him make known as yet might change?

Shall I to him make known? Um.

And you might think, okay, that it was in fact normal when Milton was writing the rules of what would have just changed.

Since then,

Anthony is whatever has changed a bit over the last few centuries and centuries of poetry that you'll be reading for in most of your final thoughts,

but it hasn't maybe changed as much as all that. Rather, if we read English by reading mostly prose now and mostly verse,

then we would probably exaggerate to ourselves the amount that it's really changed.

What, um, is different is the willingness that people have to seem to have had an earlier period to accept inventions of various kinds,

both in verse and in heightened rhetorical speech.

Um, so the example is just a quick example of the right, uh, um, we can test it by looking again at a prose text of the day.

This snippet is from an English translation of a French religious text by Nicholas Koza.

Um. It's described as treating of motives which should excitement of quality to Christian perfection.

It's first published in 1653, 17 years before Paradise Lost.

If we be unknown to God, we must make ourselves known to him by some good virtue, the same order as a modern English.

Um, this question of inversion, um, is one that has been written about not so much in recent years,

but was written about a lot in the 80s, both in literature departments and in linguistics.

Um, Gilbert Youmans wrote a series of important papers, um,

in which he examined lines like this one, discussing them under the label of syntactic inversion.

Um, and we'll go into that in a second.

But just on the words with example, you can see what's happened here is, is very similar actually to um, what happens here.

They taste good to her in the most natural version they are of sleep to me.

Um, with a little bit of extra emphasis on the me. Um.

So Youmans argues that Shakespeare's first thought in the famous um line but look the morn Clarke clad in russet mantle.

Or he says, that was the first thought he revised. She would look the morn in russet, mantle clad.

He says native speakers would normally prefer the standard word order of the prose paraphrase,

which faithfully preserves Shakespeare's vocabulary and meaning.

But evidently this version is metrically unacceptable, and consciously or unconsciously,

Shakespeare chose to resort to a poetic transformation to avoid it.

Um, he even goes on to say a careful analysis of syntactic inversions should allow us to infer the metrical principles obeyed by iambic poets.

I think there might be some problems with this argument, because he seems to think that poets want to basically avoid unnatural syntax at all costs.

Um, and so they will only do it if the metre absolutely demands.

Demands it.

But, um, that isn't really borne out by reading magical poetry, which often contains inversions with the media doesn't necessarily require it,

and it certainly isn't borne out by reading free verse poetry. There are many free verse boats.

You have obviously no metrical reason to use inversion, but when for some reason or other,

they do use a lot of it, much more than you would find in prose. I think John Ashbery is a good example.

Um. But the general idea is true.

And put it more formally. In normal speech, we might say syntax outranks prosody.

Speakers and writers are happy to make a sentence sound bad, or at least a little bit bad, if doing so is necessary to their meaning.

Maybe feedback shows in the first or second lecture I had those examples of phrases from from the management consultancy McKinsey.

In some ways, the kind of technical specialist, a proprietary,

even jargon of a workplace like that really doesn't care very much about whether or not

the phrases that are used all the time bandied around in the office are mellifluous.

They care about whether whether they have a high information content.

Um. So, as Chris Goldson and Thomas Read suggested in their excellent 1999 paper on classical Greek and poetry, the opposite might be true.

Um, so in that paper they give an example of a normal, um, but rather bad sounding sentence from a recent article in the scientific journal nature.

Infants who sleep in a room illuminated with night lights or for lighting are at

substantially greater risk of becoming nearsighted than those who sleep in the dark,

researchers in the University of Pennsylvania report in today's nature a report that nature, and they discuss that sentence in some detail,

papers worth looking at for interest in these things and poetic metre, they say, seems to reverse the natural order of things such as that,

such that the how the text sounds becomes primary and the syntactic and morphological structures used become secondary.

In meta text, the phonology outranks the syntax in interpreting the semantics,

and prosodic concerns become even more important than syntactic concerns.

They also point out, I think this is quite interesting, that there is no language in the world,

um, where the poetry is ever based on any other kind of pattern than.

Phonological prosodic ones we've never found.

They say, a metre that runs a, b a, b a, b, c, c, where a is an intransitive clause, B is transitive, and c is di transitive,

or a metre, which odd numbered lines have masculine gender and even numbered lines have feminine gender or anything of that sort.

Um. So the image below is just meant to suggest that metrical verse might be the most disorganised kind of writing in terms of syntax,

while being the most organised lines of writing in terms of prosody.

And maybe this is a zero sum game that those things, those things are related to each other.

Careful prose might be somewhere in the middle, and the technical prose, um, is is highly organised syntactically and not very organised sonically.

So traditional literary criticism certainly has long recognised that poets are sometimes careless about syntax,

that they allow themselves to use outdated forms.

Um, so Tennyson's constant, these, for example, um, just not the no word for most people, most speakers of English in the 19th century.

Um, or morphological forms like Hardy's whisk listeners in the voice.

Um, and that within a given period, they allow themselves more flexibility.

With what order the prose writers.

So in general, the flexibility that writers have about word order in English has somewhat diminished over the history of the language.

Um, and that itself is the consequence, I suppose, of another type of zero sum game.

The game in which a gradual simplification of morphology in English say one of the reasons why maybe

English is the most spoken second language in the world is people say because it's easy to learn.

Why is it easy to learn?

One of the reasons is because it doesn't have a lot of case endings, or a lot of verb conjugations that you need to learn off by heart.

The pilot problem will lie. All that stuff isn't there.

However, that being so, it makes it much more important for words to be in their right place in the sentence.

Um, otherwise, how do you know which one is the subject and which one is the object?

If there's nothing at the end of the word to show you? And the Princess Tennyson has a little song home.

They put her worried dead. She no swoon, no uttered cry.

Um, both the positioning of home at the beginning of the sentence and then no, no construction.

Um, uh, odd. Unfamiliar, perhaps. Antiquated.

Um, sometimes we call this poetic license. Um, but to return to the idea of a matrix, we might say that Williams, unusually,

is experimenting in this previous poem with writing a poem which doesn't really fit into any of these four boxes,

so she can't establish a rule that it's happy with about how much caesura and how much.

And John wants most poems having established to sort of stick to the pattern.

So just to talk through this quickly, we've talked a lot about poems in the top left hand corner.

So poems were basically in the linoleum.

Back in English, I think is particularly likely to fall into this pattern, um, where the phrase making,

um, the line unit a coincident go and catch a falling star, get with child a mandrake root.

Tell me where all past are or who clef the devil's foot.

If you wanted to write a poem and that meant you need to learn to have thoughts, um, that occur in the metre.

Um. Problems with this is that you were driven to a very high degree.

Often short programs, often they're repetitive problems. Often they contain lists.

Certainly they produce feelings of neatness. And what this is slumbered in my spirit seal would be another example.

Um, a tendency to syntactic repetitiveness,

which maybe makes this move matic in longer terms in the bottom left hand corner, um, there's still a fairly good fit.

Um, but the syntax is more complicated.

The sentences are longer. We fail to see most of zero, as longer sentences are built up from multiple short clauses of different lengths.

A choppier feeling, maybe a sense that each line is built from half lines, like an old English line, or a Latin pentameter or hexameter.

Um, there's an internal pause that will prepare us for the real thing to come.

So compare Don to the more intellectually probing style of poems.

Essay on man. There's more punctuation per line than in the previous example, but still in in fairly predictable places.

Say, first, I've got a bar for men below. What can we reason?

The end of that international phrase. But from what we know.

Of man. See Seaway. But his station here.

From which the reason. Or to which refer.

Um, naturalistic blank verse is quite often like this too.

Um, I will have such revenges on you both that all the world shall I will do such things what they are, yet I know not, etc.

Um, so knowing how to place this a zero and how to variate or dispense with it is very important to writing good verse.

Um, ideally it would be good to have Pope continued, breaking after the fifth syllable um in in the lines to come of man.

What c we from which to reason. Those lines divide exactly in half.

Um, normally more commonly so before the fourth or the sixth syllable is the place to pause.

And in fact he does continue confidently, the thought now expanding to the full measure of the line.

Three worlds are numbered 30 globally known to as ours to trace and many in our own.

So alternatively, in the top right hand corner,

one could have longer run on sentences in relatively short lines so that there is some more drama but little or no caesura.

So almost all the punctuation marks at the end of the line. Unsurprisingly, this is more common when the measure of the line is quite short.

It's more common in terms of pentameter. This is from Tennyson's In Memoriam section nine.

A lot of In Memoriam is not like this. It's. I'd say that most of the poem is, in fact, um, in the top left box.

It's the low on both, with the lines enclosing complete thoughts.

But here we get a bit of variation. Maybe you could make some sort of argument about about how that relates to the content.

But first ship that from the Italian shore sailors. The placid ocean cleans with my lost half.

As love remains. Spread thy full wings and waft him away.

So here we do get commas at the end of show comments at the end of the remains.

Um, but even when we do get comments, and this is quite often true in traditional poetry, there is some break of the sense unit.

Um. If I ship that from the Italian shore list.

Um, so the comma is because of the enclosed phrase that from the Italian, sure, but fair shape,

say list the subject and the verb have been split across across the line in a way that for this full four line stanza is relatively,

this quatrain is relatively unusual. Um.

We get stronger. Um, in a moment. More intimately welded items and broken across the.

Line break some of the more heightened sections. Uh, that comes much work for such a breeze.

Compelled by canvas. So again, the subject in the verb separated across the line by but without the intervening phrase,

which which slightly softens the sense of that abruptness.

And finally, and this is mostly what I'll fix, and professor J, the bottom right hand corner,

you get a high level of both the constant offset between the sentence and the line,

so that the sentences aren't only much longer than the lines, but they actively seem to enjoy breaking in the middle of the line.

Um, that's an issue actually, that you can see. So, um, here.

But how do I mean, what sort shall I appear? I mean, why doesn't Milton just write that it's more likely than he is actually thinking.

And I'm like pentameter lines, but he's he's chosen for some reason delineated.

But I mean, what sort shall I appear? Does it heighten the rhetorical question?

What was the reason? Um, really?

One can't underestimate how little coincidence actually there is between syntax and line in a lot of non dramatic, um, blank verse.

So Wordsworth, um, he was frequently asked in his later years, especially as poet laureate,

for comments on poems that the people sent him received an enormous quantity of post.

Um, and many of those people sent him wearing black verse, often found himself writing some version of this letter.

So to Katherine Godwin in 1829, the fault of your blank verse is that it's not sufficiently broken.

So we might not think that. But he, by his standards, the early, more sort of immature writers of blank verse,

would tend to write too many lines where the syntactic unit in the line married up.

Um, so the remainder of the lecture, then I must talk about blank verse.

Um, but before that, so you can see what's really going on.

Um, let's just return quickly and with a little bit more command of, of technical terms, um, to, to this poem that we've looked at before.

Um. It is high pitched, 1841 to to say the poet um, which is either poetic or in powerful prose, you choose.

Um. Emerson famously said that it is not metres um but metre making argument that make a poem.

In saying that he was arguing against preciousness and excessive focus on finish.

Um, in fact,

it was this is the that impressed Whitman and encouraged him a decade later to send the older poet and essayist a copy of Leaves of Grass.

Um, but I think here we might say that any distinction between meta and meta making argument or even argument making meta.

Me making all game an argument. Making meta is a false one because the arguments, the very syntax,

the thought pattern of a match is a piece is not produced by, but it's coterminous with its measurable decision.

So. So here in this one, the very syntax of the sonnet, it's apparently guileless repetition and doublings.

Um, they turn out to be a form of double crossing is shaped into iambic pentameter.

Chunk sentence one of the question shall I compare the to a summer's day sentence to all?

So occupying a single line is the answer implicitly, no, there's no point.

Thou art more lovely and more temperate. After that we get a very long sentence, six lines structured around a pair of examples.

Rough winds do shake the darling buds of May and summer's leaf.

The cycle too short a date. Temperate imperfectly rhymes with shorter date.

And this is entirely appropriate here, I think, because it's at this point the last three words of the fourth line,

that the witty confidence of the opening and its kind of cavalier tone starts to falter, and something graver enters before the phrase shorter date.

Um, Shakespeare might have been saying that his addressee isn't like summer, which is scorching and barren, or May, which is fickle.

Its first blossom easily shaken and damaged by rough winds, but in the rightness of his beauty or her.

But it's usually tamed. Midwestern man, a mild, temperate nature, like autumn, the season of fulfilment.

So come to bed. It's such a that would it be more conventional way in which the poem could have gone?

But now, with a half rhyme, we have an inkling that the problem with comparing this man or woman, um, in fact,

with comparing anyone to a summer's day might be much greater than the poem is at first willing to admit,

belonging to different orders of things existing on different timescales.

Maybe we can't plausibly compare ourselves to nature at all.

No, in fact, is our mature and hard one good temper or temperament is matched by similar indulgence in the natural world.

We can be as warm and sunny as we like, but time still marches us on relentlessly to winter.

The second example is also two lines and again emphasises how short and provisional is the finest part of the year.

Sometime too hot, the eye of heaven shines, and often is his gold complexion dimmed.

The third power extends the thought from nature to human life, pointing out that all time in the sun is also brief,

and every fair from fair sometime declines by chance or nature's changing course untrimmed.

And it's at that point that the full force of the not entirely satisfactory initial bee rhyme works itself out.

Um, so this is Helen Bender.

As one uncertainty tumbles into another, and as uncertainty wrecks itself and misfortune, we see Shakespeare's tendency to concatenation in full.

Spate mimicked Finney meekly by chance or nature's changing course.

However, despite all these things, the promise is making its adverse turn after the customary.

Um, but it seems in this bit of thinking, necessary airlines as it turns into says that but thy eternal summer shall not fade.

Another thought that fits perfectly brilliantly into its line when we come to the couplet,

the major stresses of the line the fourth, sixth, 10th syllable.

Fit perfectly with the force of the meaning. So long as men can breathe or eyes can see.

So long as men can breathe. Um, but the e and modern English.

You might worry. That there it isn't long enough with that exceptionally long vowel terminated with a heavy

consonant cluster and getting additional weight from the nuclear stress at the phrase boundaries.

In other words, so long as men can breathe. Almost feels like we really got to the end of a line.

How does he resolve that? Well, by repeating.

Um. With a difference. So long as men can breathe or eyes can see it's the same vowel sound again, even longer.

So the line ending echoing the vowel. This is yours alone.

So long live this. This is yours. Now for the fourth syllable.

And helping to mark a focal stress. Um, so this isn't a demonstrative adjective.

So long live this poem. But demonstrative pronoun, so long lives this the text right here, the one you just read.

And this gives life to V, so the perfect rhyme Z um, which gains in weight from repeated second time in 20 syllables and which gains poise.

But you might say metrically making the argument by also picking up this repeated consonants.

And this is this the. If you want to use.

I suppose the correct terminology is a voiced rather than unvoiced dental fricative.

Apparently it's one of the rarer sounds in the world's languages, appearing in only a small proportion of them.

Why am I saying all this? My point is that Shakespeare has not written this poem by having his thoughts in prose and then translating them into metre.

That was sort of the point of the human's example. The problem with it happily sacrificing a bit of clarity to do so,

or b by making a long braid of syllables, a kind of massive humbug strip of stressed and unstressed.

And then chunking this, I am back massive stuff into somewhat arbitrary groups of ten syllables.

Each line, instead is self coherent, comes to its end with some kind larger or smaller of syntactic stock.

Um, 1 or 2 of you have asked me at the end of lectures or, uh, by email about further reading.

So I just wanted to say that I, I have a list, um, of a few things on the final slides, which I guess were to get to you in the lecture.

I put them up, um, so you could look at those, but, um, if I'm afraid I, I really should say that there is nothing.

Um, there are a few things that I would like to be able to recommend to you.

I think mostly because English is a discipline with its own particular concerns and body texts and interpretive problems hasn't fully accommodated,

really, the insights of modern linguistics and people in modern linguistics departments.

I've had some amusing sort of correspondences trying to persuade them sometimes that, say, polysyllabic rhymes are often humorous,

um, always working across many different languages that I don't have a particular interest in English.

They're not particularly interested in literary text, necessarily.

Um, and they're not really tremendously interested in very subtle tonal effects, all the things that bother us.

So those two fields of tended to actually stay rather separate.

Um, but I would still say that in both of those fields, people like Chris Goldstone, who is a good example of a generative mattress,

who is quite sensitive, um, if he doesn't write much about English poetry, he is sensitive to literary style.

Um, and someone like, say, Derek Partridge, who is a terrific literary critic who writes with knowledge and rigour about about metre.

I still think from the point of view of writing poems, that both of those groups of people, um,

tend to misunderstand how important it is a metrical verse that unless the style is highly marked and that's what we hang onto,

the line and unit coincide. So, for example, there's the and the work by hand.

I don't think we'll watch that again. Um, this is um, these are some lines, um, from the first chapter of um, approaching carp as introductory guides.

Routledge. Meta a meaning two, three and four bit lines like the ones we've asked you to look at and listen to your current thousands of poems.

But one of the most common lines and metrical poems written in English is the five beat line.

So now we'll give you several five beat lines about a very famous five beat line poem.

The problem. How do I love thee? Let me count the ways. And by Elizabeth Barrett Browning.

And then they've written their own lines. Elizabeth Barrett Browning counted way she loved her poet husband.

We can hear the way she counted beats. So that her praise would come as music to our inner ear.

So those lines do have five beads. Um, but they are not happy lines.

And there is some. So in my mind there is a variable in which these are not really resembling normal lines of iambic.

Pentameter. There are a few different reasons for that, but the most important is for no purpose.

Um, that has been unnecessary.

Elizabeth Barrett Browning counted ways she loved, but it just isn't really something that pros writing the industry can do.

But particularly we can hear the ways. I mean, you can separate, um, the subject and the verb across the line.

You better have a real reason to do so. This kind of casual, I just couldn't fit it in.

So I've run over onto the next line. That isn't the way that poets in English write.

Um, I guess there's a there's many verse competitions of different kinds at Oxford,

but for the last ten years I've had the pleasure of judging the Lord Alfred Douglas Prize,

which is a prize for writing a metrical poem, but ideally a solid in English.

And we always get some amazingly good entries and, you know,

lots of competent entries and then some that on poems or on the metre at all, or maybe doing other things that are fun too.

But I would say that the middle ground of entries, that is usually the problem with them,

or one of the reasons why the stricter poets that I work with, the structures of all,

was Geoffrey Hill,

who actually refused to give the prize two years in a row because he said that no one had written a solid and he didn't want natural mistakes.

Um, a lot of the poems you get thrown are even when they're very interesting as poems.

Um, because of this sort of mishandling of the, of the line. And it's something to think about if you were interested in, in writing yourself.

Um. Okay, so in blank verse, um, everything is different.

The argument that I've been making so far, um, over a number of lectures, the poets think metrically, um, with the already learned echoing re echoing,

reoccurring, doubling metrical structures, driving rather than limiting the composition doesn't hold in the same way.

In some ways. The problem with this example is it's too much like blank verse.

Um, Auden, Don even Shakespeare in sonnet 18, these people are thinking in the metres that they've chosen.

But what is happening in blank verse? Um, so these are some of the things that are wrong with.

This is, uh. So yeah, if you are writing a song, like, don't you really come across as you were at the seventh foot like that?

Um, okay. This, um, so what is happening here?

This is the opening of Keats's unfinished epic Hyperion, a poem about the unhappiness of Saturn and the other Titans after being unseated,

uh, deep in the deepest myths of Greek mythology by Zeus and the other Olympic gods.

It was published the year before his death, after he decided to give up on it and against his wishes,

as the preface itself advertised, um in letters, he said that his reason for not, um, publishing it was a metrical one.

There are too many male tonic inversions, um, but inversion, which is not actually um,

and anything approaching with male tonic levels isn't the only metrical problem here.

Um, a more significant one. So I'm raising this as an example of.

Of blank verse. Um, that is a little bit like the cartridge example.

It's blank verse that um, although written by great poet, um, really great rhyming poet that is having some difficulty being blank verse.

Um, that one poem is the relentless use a week adjectives as if trying to pad out a poem that wants to be that naturally thinks in not pentameter,

but tetrad matter. So deep in the shady sadness of a veil far sunken from the healthy breath of moon.

Far from the fiery noon and eves. One star sat grey. Had Saturn quiet as a stone.

Still as the silence round about his lair. Forest on forest hung about his head like cloud on cloud.

What could you take out? Um, I mean, you could take out, say, shady, deep in the sadness of a veil for sunken from the breath of moon.

Far from the moon and even one star. Um, those take out the adjectives and you've basically reduced it to amateur.

There's also problem with half Roman assonance. And so hence the bathos of quiet as a stow following Richard Saturn.

Uh, general tendency to flourish at the line ending, and perhaps most all from blank, was a series of syntactic repetitions.

So the natural if for some kind of fall from the first line, paralleling another long adjectival phrase of position.

Um, perhaps some self-consciousness about this.

Actually, some felt metrical unease may explain the revision that you can just about see in manuscript.

Um, in line seven. So originally Keats had set out confidently, forest on forest hung about his heads, his head like clouds that, um.

But then he hesitates. Um, you can think.

You can just about see that. Um. He hesitates, substituting who's.

Then he writes something. Um, a little bit unclear, really, what it is, um, which he crosses out in turn, um,

at which point he gives up and realises that a sentence in blank verse can end, just as it can start, um, a line.

So, like cloud on cloud, uh, marks the first real blank verses zero and Hyperion.

Problem is that it sticks out like a pig and a sore thumb, because the previous thoughts are,

with unfailing regularity, being fitting in a sort of solid like way into the pattern of pentameter.

It's normal in rhyming poems. And Keats began Hyperion in the autumn of 1818,

only a few months before he launched into the astonishing creative effort of the intricately rhymed, mostly pentameter straight phase of the odes.

It's almost here, I think, a kind of helplessness about the way that rhyme is happening,

despite the fact, well, really doesn't want it D in the air and so on.

But I will end now by looking at the opening of another romantic, very first poem,

another poem with which the author was dissatisfied for different reasons, and which she was uncertain about publishing.

We talked about Wordsworth's original opening to The Prelude, his weird decision to start in the middle of the line before.

So I thought we could end by looking at the way he, in fact.

Um. That's it. This is the thunderous bosoms like cloud on the way.

He, um. The way he. In fact.

And so this is the the way he started. Was it for this, that one, the fairest of all rivers.

Love to blend his murmurs with my nasal. Um.

This is the 1850 prelude. Um.

Kind of. It isn't tremendously different in the opening passage from the 18 to a five.

Fairly age. Um, I have a general preference for reading things in the the author's final intention,

which is normal in textual criticism and normal in most areas of English,

but in the romantic period, for all kinds of interesting reasons, perhaps to do with the logic of romanticism itself,

a preference among poets of that period for first thoughts, ever last thoughts, as well as some very impressive,

ingenious acts of editing like the Just Salon court edition of the Prelude in the 20s,

which which rescued, if you like, the 1805 original version of the original manuscript.

Um, people tend to read the earlier version. Um.

If there is blessing in this gentle breeze, visiting the wallet,

fans might seem half conscious of the joy it brings from the green fields and from your nauseous sky.

Whatever its mission, the soft breeze can come to none more grateful than to me.

Escape from the vast city. While long had pined. A discontented sojourner.

Now free, free as a bird to settle where I will.

What is odd about these sentences? Well. Almost everything.

I mean, to begin with, the problem opens with a dummy subject, not the breeze blesses me, but there is blessing in this breeze for me.

So there, as usual, we expect to find a noun, you know. Good as in the structure.

It's raining. Weather is generally fond of these constructions, which might at first sight seem quite peculiar.

Choice for an opening a week dilatory start a picture that refuses to come into focus because the really important details where,

when, who are withheld. Um. But think to you the first line of the mortality owed.

There was a time when. My Meadow Grove stream or the Boy went underrepresented eventually knitted into the Facebook of the party.

There was a boy, um or the boat stealing episode.

Um, it was what was an act of stealth and troubled pleasure.

In fact, this structure, the sentences subject is delayed by an apparent need to plot and locate it, although very imprecisely, in space and time.

Um seems to be completely Genesis, basically the genesis of this poem, as we look before at the was it for this fragment?

Was what? For what? Um, um.

But what can we say here about the waiting and loading and ordering of clauses?

Isn't the sentence askew like an old fashioned scale before you start to apply the metal weights?

If you were to paraphrase it, it means something like what? The gentle breeze blesses and visits me and seems even what it stands my cheek

half conscious of the joy it brings me from the green fields and your sky.

Whatever its mission might be, no one could be more grateful than I am.

Having escaped from the vast city where I was discontented and at long pined, I am now finally free.

Free as a bird to settle where I will. On the one side where we have as a nation that blessing is, um, on the other hand,

a huge amount of qualification, adjectival and adverbial qualification.

Say the breezes, gentle. It's a visit and it's the subject of an itself interrupted relative clause.

It seems half conscious of the joy it brings, even as simultaneously it founds my cheek.

And then the nature of the joy and the breezes activity of bringing it is itself

qualified with a double locative from the green fields and from Malaysia sky.

Second sentence is similar. We get in the main clause. Not much at all, not much.

Rather than was it liking the breeze, no one can be more grateful than he is.

And once again, this rather minimal thought in terms of information is fleshed out with a large number of adjectival and adjunctive modifiers.

The breeze is soft, its motions uncertain, and the speaker the person to whom, as an indirect object,

it comes as escape from the city where he spends a long and discontented time is free,

free as a bird, etc. if the syntax of these sentences, then their sense of relative proportion, even their informational content, seems warped.

Um, the phonology sound patterning is is very hardy, structured much more so than it would be in prose.

How so? After the exclamation oh, we get there is a blessing or blessing is slightly more stressed than there.

And then, in this gentle breeze, with the nuclear stress on breeze dominates the lexical stress on,

um, gentle and certainly the mild alternating stress leant in.

Moreover, to the extent that we're now grouping the clauses, it also dominates the stress on blessing.

So we have a line with two major stresses and some minor ones, the major ones a blessing and breeze.

Both syllables, of course, begin the same way with a voiced labial b, followed by liquid uh,

an end in a similar way with the sibilant, the voiced z being more marked than the unvoiced, but the vowel in the middle is altered.

Bless to breeze. Transit transforms into an f into e um.

The second one two. We've got two major stresses first on visited and then on cheek, and so two in the third conscious and brings the.

When we think about this, um, you start to see that there is actually an intricate and pleasurable kind of patterning going on.

Alliteration, vowel modification, repetition. This picks up breeze shortening the long e sound slightly, modifying the initial consonant.

But cheek comes brings us back to that central long vowel sound in a kind of rhyme and assignment rhyme.

This sound, of course, is picked up later in fields. And in fact,

all of the strongly stressed words other than g and with a sibilant until the sentence reaches its end and elegantly reverses the pattern.

Putting the s first and swapping the echoing E chain out for the diphthong.

I think it is quite difficult to know how in your own essays, or certainly in exam essays.

One really might describe these minor effects of sound patterning versus the non rule governed effects.

Um, but I think it's worth having a go. They are important.

In the next sentence you can see immediately in the first line, um, how some of the sounds are picked up again.

Um. I think, perhaps even more importantly, in terms of driving on the meaning here.

Um, these aren't merely echoes. Um, but they're reprisals.

They're modifications.

They're patterns of call and response, um, that tend, when they occur above the line under the sentence and to reinforce a sense of closure.

Of course, when when you get a sentence that ends. Both at the line and into rest.

Under the sentence end, that closure is is doubled.

Um, that language is also intricately self-referential. It's possible.

I think it's important to say this to have metrical allusions. It's one of the allusions to particular phrases and words.

Milton's English was quite different from the English. Was its day just as well?

This is different from ours.

But while the metrical contract lasted, all poets remain committed to writing certain kinds of problems in certain kinds of formal forms.

They spoke to each other in ways that are impossible in prose.

So after this opening was with carries on in a deliberately, almost, uh, so serious comic, um, high security, small tonic style.

The earth is all before me. Then I my lips is with a heart joyous, no scared at its own liberty,

etc. this isn't only a lexical allusion repetition of a phrase that Milton had already written.

Um, so the world was all before them were to choose their place of rest.

But it's a metrical illusion. Um, so Milton writes at the end of Paradise Lost.

The world was all before them to choose their place of rest and providence, their guide.

They hand in hand with wandering steps and solo through Eden took their solitary way.

I was at the end of Paradise Lost. The phrase Earth is all before me occupies seven syllables of the line.

It's an awkward place, as I've said before, to break. Then there's this is the next phrase, and almost every line end.

Okay. So to to conclude, I've already mentioned some of the arguments,

arguments about radical individualism that we used by poets in the early 20th century to justify why they wrote in free verse.

You might remember Richard Aldington is an antagonist of Eliot.

He said in 1914, in The Egoist, that the old accented verse forced the poet to abandon some of his individuality,

most of his accuracy and all his style in order to wedge his emotions into some preconceived and sometimes childish formality.

Free verse permits the poet all his individuality because he creates his cadence instead of copying other people's.

Later in the 20th century.

The 1950 manifesto Projective Verse, Charles Olson would tell us that a poet should be recording the listening he has done to his own speech, um,

assuming implicitly that the poet who did this would find his or her his own speech in some way peculiar,

marked out from other peoples, radically different.

So in the first few lectures, I was trying to explain some of the reasons why, least in my mind, this is impossible or pointless.

Listening to one's own speech in many important respects would be periodically the same as listening to any other speakers.

As far as stress goes. Um, but I would end by saying that I think for if any of you do write poems, um, and even if you don't, the young poets,

poets who are developing, reading and sounding out other people's rhythms is equally or more important than trying to find rhythms of your own,

and that it's through learning poems off by heart that particular cadences and

metrical effects can be first absorbed and perhaps later reconfigured or transformed.

Um, even when poets do write about genuinely coming across some new sound effect, they do often write about it in terms of prior experience.

So Hopkins has about his very innovative The Wreck of the Deutschland in a letter I

had long had haunting my ear the echo of a new rhythm which I now realised on paper.

So it's a new rhythm, but it's one produced by the past.

Somehow it's been haunting, it's been echoing. It's a half heard cadence that's occupy the mind's ear.

I don't know if that's a phrase long before the actual words of this particular poem, um, and the occasion that motivated it came to mind.

Um, so I'm sure that we are all glad now that we have cheap printed books and the endless magic of the internet, including.

I like to bring any number of great poems in English before our eyes.

Um, but I think we do lose something.

Some sense of a kind of shared aural soundscape by reading so many poems, by scanning our eyes and moving them over the text so quickly.

Um, and by not learning anything off by heart that there's a kind of distinctive familial chatter.

Um, Keats has a lovely sonnet about that sort of anxiety of influence.

Um, how many bards go the lapses of time where he says, you know,

all the poets in the past could make it really, really hard for me to write anything at all as a poet.

But in fact, I have developed a way of turning them into a sort of white noise in the background.

You like the sound of the water and the breeze through the tree.

Um, so I would end these lectures by saying, if this is a subject that interests you,

even if it's not a subject that interests you, I think the content will be useful.

Um, for you course, especially in paper three and then next year and finals.

Um, but if it interests you, then, then don't take my word about the way that will meet you.

In other words, go out and learn at least one poem in each of the forms.

You know, allow those metres to to haunt your ears.

Or if you want to try, try to write your own.

If you do want to write your own poems, ever, you better get on with it.

Um, because verse, metrical verse is a language, um, that seems like other languages to be very easy to acquire in childhood,

pretty easy to acquire at your age, and almost impossible after that if you leave it too late.

So Wordsworth, um, says in stopping, let's say one of many. He writes to a man of probably my age now he's he's sent him some poems.

There is just no point in you doing this if you have not practice mature in youth.

I should apprehend that your thoughts would not easily accommodate themselves to those chains,

so as to give you a consciousness that you are moving under them and with gracefully and with spirit.

I question not that you've written with rapidity.

Nothing is more easy, but in nothing is it more true than in composing verse that the nearest way home is the longest way about.

Um. Thank you. I'll put. So this is the further reading.

It's relatively short, I think probably the easiest thing for you to do if you want to look at that is,

is to access it online, um, that all of these things are things that I, at one point or another mentioned.

Um, but if anyone wants something more specific, I'm happy always to answer questions by email.

So thank you everybody.

