[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
Let's get started. It's my first time giving a lecture in this beautiful new building and lecture hall.

I'm guessing quite a lot for your first year,

and you've already been to a lot of lectures and are familiar with all the many ways in which I can embarrass myself.

Um, if you're wondering, the picture on my home screen is of a very small Greek island, Ithaca.

Calamus. Um, okay, so, um, let me know.

Can you hear? Okay. Great. Why do you think in future that it does not make much sense in a lecture of kind of this size for people to be sitting?

Up there because it is just very hard for the lecturers to kind of maintain eye contact simultaneously with people down here.

And so obviously the really large audience is necessary. But I think for next week, we all try to sit here down to the lower part, possibly.

Um. Okay. So metre.

What is metre? Doesn't sound like the most engaging topic, I have to admit for a series of lectures.

Um, I, when I was an undergraduate at Cambridge, never went to the 9 a.m. lectures on Greek accents,

um, that were given by Professor Diggle because they sounded so boring.

And then I realised that I didn't know how to do three accents at all, and it was never possible to learn.

This lecture will repeat next year. So meta means literally measured language.

And the English word comes from a Greek word from the word metron.

Of course, that's the same word that gives us lots of other words in English.

Um, meta. In the other sense of length.

KM is a metric system assessment metrics.

But in these other cases, what is being measured isn't in question.

It might be difficult to measure someone's height precisely because they slouch, because they're wearing shoes,

because we're not sure who's doing my Children yesterday quite how to balance the book on their head.

Um, because their height, um, rather than being an attractive round number and even 150, say,

is between two numbers and difficult to round, and it might be difficult to place absolute faith in reported measurements.

A man who says that he's 1.75m tall might be, on average, more than a centimetre shorter than a woman who self-reports the same height.

I know that because that's my height. Um, but no one doubts that every person has, on a given day, at least an exact a measurable height.

In principle, it's completely fixed. But in the case of metre in by which we really don't know what we're measuring, we're measuring something.

But what is it? It's just very hard to define.

Um, at the top of this introductory slide is Samuel Johnson's.

Attempt at definition in his 1755 dictionary A good speaker of English.

You've never even heard of meta or Ryme, and there are lots of them might, I think, if presented with a volume of Shakespeare's sonnets,

either an early edition this is the first quarter, or any modern edition, or even even Project Gutenberg.

Notice that the poems have the same shape on the page, the same number of lines, and perhaps a fixed pattern of recurrent sounds at the line.

And perhaps this really would also, in reading the lines over, begin to count out syllables,

noticing that the lines are also all the same length in a more precise way.

Um, they get most of the way, but never all the way to the end, all the way to the right hand edge of a page and an average book.

At some point, then they might figure out that there is a common pattern underlying all of these poems.

Um, and that might be where you are too. But what exactly is it?

What is it really? How does it work? Why was it important?

What does it mean for poets in the 19th century and before to have used the pattern well or badly,

elegantly or clumsily for them to follow slavishly or broken it meaningfully?

Um, for them to have parroted someone else's meta, um, or introduced some interesting new changed or metre.

Um. Another important question kind of behind all of this, I think, is why,

at the beginning of the 20th century, did poets in English almost entirely stop using it?

So the second half of the lecture will be, uh, slightly, but hopefully not too technical.

Um, explanation of what stresses because we that we talk about stress all the time.

We mark up the syllables where this is the stressed syllable, this is the unstressed one.

But what actually is it? How do we really be sure the syllable stressed or not?

Um, almost all languages. I would say there are 1 or 2 exceptions have developed, um, some form of metrical poetry or poetry,

which plays often stylised as some essential aspect in the language itself.

Now, what that aspect is varies.

Um, if some of you did Latin at school, you might have learned that Latin poetry depends on on quantity, so on how long a syllable is.

And that's sometimes said that it's not entirely, um, it's sometimes said to be, um, something that's different from stress.

It's certainly true that stress has all the features mixed into it besides duration.

Um, but before we get onto the stress, but let's just, um, I'm going to talk for about 20 minutes about why all of this matters,

especially when you're beginning a course, most of you beginning, of course, um, where all of the compulsory content,

everything other than pretum is paper fall, which you'll do next to, um, of course,

you can do special options and dissertations and all the compulsory content, um, although in appearance may before is all written before 1910.

So in the poetry of or in English before 1910 is with good lancing a tiny set of possible exceptions, kind of 0.0, nought 1%.

It's all in metre. Um.

And even in the 19th century, almost all poetry in all European languages, in fact, was written in recognisable metres.

Um. So in this tradition, MeToo was recognised as being both intensely pleasurable and intensely dangerous, a form of seduction and enchantment.

A brightly coloured web, a spell. Maybe the sweets in which a child's bitter but wholesome medicine can be hidden.

That's Sidney, the first quotation.

On the slide, even as the child is often brought to take most wholesome things by hiding them in such other words, have a pleasant taste.

Um. Soft, smooth words that trifle on the ear.

Second, quotations from the early 19th century poet John Clare.

Or, perhaps less pleasingly, a trick that, like the bloom of youth.

Resembles real beauty, but somehow falls short of it. It's.

It's transitory. It's what you deceitful. Um.

Did they not said I, um, resemble the faces of adolescents.

Young, but not really beautiful when the bloom of youth abandons them.

Um, that's from Plato, from the 10th book of the Republic.

For Plato, who imagined a highly restricted and limited role for poets in his ideal republic, the.

Ostentatious devices and ornaments that parents use threaten to conceal what was.

Not really true. Thoughts that were banal, statistical, simply wrong.

Um, in the early dialogue I on, he compares poets to to drunk people to God of backache revellers um,

suggesting that the state of mind you would actually need to even start to compose a poem and metre will be a kind of ecstatic delirium, he says.

The lyric poets are not in their right mind when they're composing their beautiful strains, but when falling under the power of music a metre,

they're inspired and possessed, like maidens who draw milk and honey from the rivers when they're under the influence of Dionysus,

but not when they are in their right mind. In book ten, the this quotation confirms the attack sharpens,

preoccupied with reality and its representations, trees and various ways of shining at it.

Socrates makes a more global claim. Um, it's not really that poets are mad, um,

out of their right mind that the productions suffer from an all encompassing metaphysical inferiority rather than being representations of the forms.

So he has the idea that, say a real table, a real chair is not the real.

I mean, the ones we call these wall and say these chairs, it's not a real chair itself.

It is a representation of an imitation of the real chair, which is a kind of idealised chair out there somewhere accessible to all.

But that in art, in poetry, what poets and painters are doing other imitating, not the form of the chair, but the the one in front of you.

So it's it to, in the language of Greek is like counting inclusively at three removes from reality.

Um, and this is an idea that many later poets sometimes picking up on the lineaments of Plato's quarrel,

but altering his value judgements, have have rejoiced him.

Um, Hopkins is all things, all things counter, original, spare, strange, whatever is fickle, freckled.

You know how this sort of metaphysical littleness, um,

is is being celebrated the and but the main point I want to make is that Plato wouldn't be saying all of this.

We wouldn't be having this endless quarrel between philosophy and poetry, by which he means metrical bargy.

If poetry hadn't been really important, it hadn't been a really worthy antagonist, which I think now.

And Canterbury, it just it just isn't. People just don't care about it that much.

Um, and he wasn't concerned that its power was primarily rhetorical, that like sophists,

you make the weaker argument, the stronger it was somehow going to persuade us of things that weren't true.

That wasn't the primary worry anyway, that he's a bit worried about, that it comes from a deeper property, the manipulation of sound with sense, um,

the capacity of poetry to follow along with all the normal rules that you have in language is using the right words,

words that exist already in the lexicon, modifying them in the right ways, morphologically, the rules of syntax.

But along with those rules, there are additional rules, um,

rules of its own rules that make party language not only engaging and winning and persuasive,

but maybe more importantly, memorable, um, transmissible and incorruptible.

Um, and in societies, particularly before writing, but also after the invention of writing and after the invention of printing,

it was a really important device for preserving and transmitting information.

Um, Aristotle says this is why verse which is measured is always more easily remembered then prose which isn't.

The measures of verse can be numbered. Um, nowadays I think only the smallest vestiges of this remain.

Maybe some of you made up kind of little rhymes or jingles when you were doing revision for A-levels.

I think probably quite a few of us. Still, when we're thinking about how many days there are in each month,

find ourselves reaching, um, for the oh little rhyme 30 days hath September, April, June.

And remember, all the rest have 31 excepting February alone, and that has 28 days clear and 29 in each leap year.

Um, some types of meat. You're not just helpful, um, remembering pieces of factual information, catchy phrases,

but they also act as restraints, as clever guards on their own corruption.

This is a more subtle point, so just be Tatlock first observed,

I think in a 1936 article about Dante in Pmla, the intricate scheme of Dante's rhyming of sarima,

the form that he made his own, is not only a narrative device of great subtlety, but it is a powerful constraint on textual corruption.

It's a kind of of error check. So the pattern, as you probably know, is the interlocking series of threes.

You get ABBA and then the B rhyme is pulled out. So you BCB, then the crime is pulled out and something new is added, the CDC, um, and so on.

Um, with the inner and the outer rim of the new chess set repeating the odd sound out of the immediate predecessor.

So other than the very beginning or end of the poem, and it is always a bit difficult if you're writing in that form to know how to end.

Um, it means that it has. It can never be left out by a sleepy and careless.

Or interventionist scribe without setting off a kind of alarm in the mind, a metrical alarm that something has gone wrong.

It's a way for poets to make sure that other people. Don't corrupt what they've written.

So. As I've said in the second part of the lecture, I mentioned what stress is and how it might be measured acoustically.

That is how we could visualise it by looking at loudness, duration and so on.

And then at two major kinds of stress in England lexical stress on words and prosodic stress,

which is the stress that you produce when you add words together.

So the things which I have seen, I now can see no more.

And all of these words have stress on them really, because they're all monosyllables.

But nonetheless the line, does anyone know what poem that's from the things which I have seen, I now can see no more.

From Wordsworth's immortality ode.

Um, a great summary of sort of Wordsworth's whole, whole project, whole idea, um, that you as a child see beautiful and dazzling things,

and then maybe around the age that you are now, um, they all start to fade away with the light of common day.

Um, but so the question of how is it that these words, how is it that some of those words are more stressed than than others?

Um. Okay, so, um, words with, um, just to finish the introduction, the kind of cultural side of this.

Um, what happened to the intensity of response that we see in Aristotle, Plato and so on?

Having, um, the response that natural language was thought to provoke.

What was of the passion of metre? Um, in this letter from 1804.

He's talking about how how do you what do you do when you've got a book of poems? Have you read it out?

This rule should be taken with limitations for not just speak of other reasons.

As long as there shall have the marked termination that rhyme gives it.

And as long as blank version be printed in lines,

it will be physically impossible to pronounce the last words or syllables of the line with the same indifference.

Interesting word is the others.

I not to give them an intonation of one kind or another, or to follow them with a pause not called out for by the passion of the subject.

But by the passion of metre merely. The idea that when you come to the end of the line of blank verse,

it might be the case that the sense of it actually runs on the verb that you're waiting

for to complete the information you already have isn't coming until the following line.

And then if this were not in a metrical poem, you most definitely would not want to pause.

In fact, you would need to not pause to make yourself be understood. We don't normally, after the subject before the verb, make a kind of big pause.

But the if you're really a poem, you do need to pause always at the end of the line.

And so you get a kind of counterpoint relationship that's always interesting.

The offset between. What you meaning what you're saying in a pro sense, what you're saying in a in a natural sense.

Um. Okay.

So in a minute I'm going to play you an audio file which offers, um, several different types of modern non poetic metric language.

Um, I do think I used to give lectures on free verse, and I might give them again, um,

the topic of where meeting went isn't really, um, anything that we can cover here, but, um, just two minute digression.

Um, I was showing some of my students last week that if you try to do a Google n-gram of the phrase free verse,

I mean often n grams on maybe as satisfyingly dramatic as one would hope they would be.

But if you try typing first into Google N-gram, it's really astonishing.

Like it is just a phrase that wasn't used um, before about 19 1415, and that it just shoots to prominence.

It becomes incredibly popular and also, in fact, incredibly popular for poets.

Almost all poems in English, after the word came into use have been written in free verse.

And nowadays, if someone publishes writes a sonnet, we tend to think of that as kind of an oddity,

sometimes even, um, as a form of writing that might suggest certain kinds of political views.

Um, so in the 70s and 80s and of American poets, some new formalists were criticised for writing an Arabic pentameter,

as if by doing that, they were subtly aligning themselves with conservative product of the state, with reaganism and so on.

You might think that that's nonsense, but people are often very keen to make these kinds of connections.

Um, I would also say there are a lot of scholars who've worked, um, in recent years.

Um, both. Well, not so much on metre as a linguistic phenomenon in English departments,

but a lot who've done very good work on the complexity and passion of sort of metrical criticism or writing about meat in particular,

at the end of the 19th century. So people like Meredith Martin and Newfie friends, um,

so thinking about the way that these kinds of judgements about poems form might shade very fast into aesthetic,

ethical or even ideological propositions.

So Meredith Martin's book, for example, it is the premise of this book that the literary movements around the time of the First World War,

along with the national pedagogical and political movements in the period leading up to it,

essentially erased a vast history of debates about Fuzzification, and English might not originally think that that would be particularly intuitive.

Okay, so it has almost vanished. A few poems.

Poets still use it sometimes, and sometimes they're treated rather suspiciously when they when they do that.

But it's not the case that our pleasure in language that is not prosaic, in language that's rhythmic in some way.

Has vanished. Um. So the. They'll pay you this audio file.

Some of these examples are iambic. Um, like the phrase I have a dream.

A phrase repeated many times. Unfortunately, in Martin Luther King's 1963 speech at the Lincoln Memorial.

And it's a phrase, I have a dream that sets off a pervading beat to which later parts of sentences can return.

So I have a dream that one day this nation will rise up and live out the true meaning of its creed.

We hold these truths to be self-evident.

What is that? We hold these truths to be self-evident.

It's. Well, sometimes called a natural pentameter. I mean, natural because it's just occurred without probably thinking about it at all.

Um, that was one of the reasons why the basic metres in English work as well as they do, is because they are close to the rhythms of speech.

Um. There are other lines.

Um. Not always pentameter. Hexameter is. Let us not wallow in the valley of despair.

Um, all the pentameter is to take the tranquillising drug of gradualism.

Um, some of these other examples have more, more complicated and no lambic patterns.

And it's an interesting idea that maybe one of the reasons why traditional metres in English,

the ones that we'll talk about in this series of four lectures stopped working,

was because something actually has shifted in English pronunciation, maybe to some extent in,

in word choice, um, which makes them a little bit less workable than they once were.

Let me play this same phrase in a. Choo choo choo choo choo choo choo choo choo choo choo.

We're going on a bear hunt. We're going to catch a big one.

What a beautiful day. We're not scared.

Uh oh. I have a dream that one day this nation will rise up and live out the true meaning of its creed.

We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal.

I'm not going. To keep going.

Cowboy boots. And a very sad little red bag.

So we're going to go right back. Hey. The original lyrics to it were scrambled eggs.

Oh, my baby, I love your legs. Uh.

But I changed them. It was like this.

Yesterday. All my troubles seemed so far away.

Now it looks as though they're here to stay.

That about? Um, so what what are these examples?

What are these examples? Show us. We're going on a bear hunt.

Would you be able to analyse the meteors? That I have to say, when I first saw that video, what?

I had heard that recording of Michael Rosen reading it. I was quite surprised by how singsong his kind of performance of it was.

And definitely then also the way that the thousand and one times that I read that book

to my kids when they were small as maybe words that the way that I pronounced it,

I started to hear it. The underlying pattern as being more it's more song like, um, the video above, this is dated a little bit.

So I put this on last year. There's some bits, a little black bag. That was it was a tick tock video, but the New York Times picked it up.

And anyway, what interested me about the story was that The New York Times seemed really surprised,

first of all, that people were capable of making recurrent metrical phrases.

And you might ask yourself what those what pattern those phrases actually actually have.

Sam was a little red bag. Any ideas?

Some boos and a little red bag.

My hunch is that in modern English, we like patterns that some of even Tennyson's later problems show this with a relatively more unstressed syllable,

says some birds and, uh, little red.

Um, so the first one is, instead of being two, iambs is one stressed syllable and three unstressed ones.

But the article was written from a position that it's strange that people should do this if you don't think it is.

Or maybe it is strange that people enjoy sound patterning, enjoy metrical patterning.

And then the Paul McCartney example is maybe the most interesting one.

So he's supposed to have woken up one morning and just come up with scrambled eggs?

Oh my baby, how I love your legs.

In other words, that he had thought of the melody of yesterday and he was just using the first words as filler so he could practice that.

He practice singing and see if it needed refining, and that the real words were only fitted later to the grid.

Um, I mean, in some ways this is how poets compose too.

Not entirely, but, um, beginning with melody, beginning with the metre that they're going to write.

And I find that students are very often keen to to say as soon as they start reading Milton or Wordsworth,

that a lot of the lines in the poem are purposive deviations from the metre, and that's almost never the case.

Writers before the 20th century of the 20th century they do. Before the 20th century, they almost never, unless they make a mistake,

unless there's some sort of textual error where you've had the wrong thing transmitted.

They don't break the metre on purpose. That's just not the point that might play with it.

There are certain kinds of reversals of certain feet in the line, maybe half rhymes,

Tropic inversion, the beginning of the line, these things that they do quite a lot.

Um, they're obviously felt to be meaningful, um, that you're just breaking the pattern entirely.

Wouldn't, wouldn't have occurred to them. They begin with that tune, the ceramic pentameter tune,

and then it governs not just the words you can use, but the kinds of sentences that you can write.

Um. Okay. Um. Let's get on with the choo choo choo choo choo choo choo choo choo choo.

There we go. Okay, so this is an important point. So the traditional way that we scan poems might be something like this.

I don't know if you were taught to do this at school, but you're where you mock afternoons do.

Some of us would not do that. Then you mock up the syllables of the stress and the syllables that are unstressed.

I mean, if you did Latin, you might have been writing kind of long bars to show the stress syllables.

I have a background in classics, and I still find I sort of tend to do that even in English.

You might only mock up the stressed ones in a sense, and you only need to mock up the ones that are marked and the other ones, um, unstressed.

But. So this is an idealisation. What do I.

What do I mean by that? This repeating binary pattern. Um, there are some problems with it.

First, it has difficulty explaining why some words. Um, for example, the v, so long as men can breathe wise can see.

So long lives this. And this gives life to the.

How that woods is very, very stressed out is this gives life to the.

I bet if you listened to your recording you would find that any actor, any person who read this out would would spend a long time over that word.

Maybe as much as the rest of the line altogether. Um, but in other poems by Shakespeare, the Z is not stressed, it's unstressed.

I have found the same word for both. Um.

Let's listen. So this is actually just this is how this works.

This is a recording, a program. I'll say more about how this works in a minute.

But, um, as long as men can breathe or eyes can see.

So the recording, the pulses at the top. This is a visual representation of the audio recording of John Gielgud, the famous Shakespearean actor.

And then there's an attempt to work out what is going on by mapping it out graphically.

And there are a few things, really that, um, are being looked at.

One is the loudness and the other is the pitch.

So the loudest in the pitch, in other words, um, uh, represented so the two pitches, the blue line and the intensity is the green line, the loudness.

And those are represented vertically. So when it gets more loud or when the pitch is higher, you know, the line goes up.

So or seems to have both strangely, surprisingly, uh, high, a high intensity and a high pitch.

The third thing that is going on here. Duration is going to be kind of on the x axis.

So you can see which which syllables take the longest here to say.

Is that the ones that you would expect? I mean, it's certainly not the case if you the.

So this is stress. This is very long isn't it. And breathe is very.

Very long, but it doesn't look like the idealisation that I showed you before, because so long according that idealisation long is is is stressed.

But can you see the stress? Where is the stress along? But you might ask yourself a really good question.

What, if anything, in the acoustic signal is showing?

What are the stresses? We can hear someone and act as they read that line out and we can identify, I think, pretty easily.

And we would naturally also say it in the same way, more or less the same way.

What is making those sound stressed? In some ways, it seems as if the most dramatic feature is not anything to do with a binary oscillation,

but it's to do with the fact that two syllables, these two verbs breathe and see in terms of their duration.

I mean, after brief, there was a pause, but they see the there's there's no pause of time in whether the pause.

Continues over here. This is just the pronunciation of the civil. They massively sort of dominate over all of the others.

So it looks from that pattern as if the idealisation might be iambic pentameter is a metre in which the two of the syllables,

so long as men can breathe the sixth and the 10th.

Have a much, much longer duration than all of the others. It is true that, you know, I'm big fans.

I'm at a Shakespeare festival. This that the often the resources you are in the middle of the line here.

It's quite a weak one, so long as men can breathe. But that is the end of its own little phrase.

And then all eyes can see often that we break some six four patterns.

So there is a break after four syllables, well, as a break after six, and either the fourth and or six,

depending on where the break comes and the 10th syllable are the most stressed.

In other words, the idea that you you learn when you first brought me to the zone is stress.

And stress is just not really true. There are degrees of stress.

In reality, um, and in fact, to write pentameter well means being aware that if you actually tried to write it so that each

second syllable was heavily stressed and you the first and the odd numbers were not stressed at all,

I think you would produce something.

It was very ugly, um, and just attempted, um, you know, and was actually quite hard to fit normal English sentences into, um.

Okay. So let's let's go on now to stress proper.

So I said it was hard to define me. So I think it's even harder to define stress that you probably you do know what it it's what you know.

You know what it is. But how would you define it? I don't have any ideas how they would define it.

People never used to like to answer questions in lectures in the old lecture theatre.

I have a feeling that something about the formality of this is going to make it even.

But would anybody like to say what stresses? Yeah, I think so.

Right. Okay. Exactly. So is the emphasis is added emphasis of some kind on particular syllables in a line.

Um, or or in speech two. So the Princeton Encyclopaedia of Poetry in Poetics notes, uh,

that stress operates in various ways on scales from the word through the sentence I remember.

So that's very helpful. What ways you might wonder at what scales, um, John Lennon's popular, still quite popular.

The Poetry Handbook begins by noting that Old English poetry is based on patterns of stress or accent,

but then goes on quite quickly to use the word accent to refer, not to relative syllabic prominence um, but e.g. in Northumbrian accents, um,

and other than some vague references to pitch and weight, uh, which are really just other words possible for the same thing.

Well, stress actually is made up of is left unclear in some ways.

I'm going to say that's because actually we're not really all that sure it is some combination,

it seems particularly of of a high pitch or possibly some, some linguists would argue varying pitch.

So you can see so long as men can breathe, breathe, you might say, at least in some pronunciations,

has a pitch that breathe, that goes up and then it comes down again.

That's called a pitch versus a high pitch or sort of marked pitch, kind of pitch change.

So this high up on the on the chart or you see a kind of, you know, a curve, um,

loudness sliders actually seems to be probably the least important aspect of it.

And duration. Um, one way you could test these ideas is that now with modern technology,

you can normalise recordings synthetically, um, so that you stripping out one of these elements,

if you flatten the pitch, you can still get something that is not only very understandable, but I think sounds actually very metrical.

It just sounds sort of dead in that, um, flat if you equalise the volume.

It really doesn't sound that low. I mean, it sounds pretty similar to the way it sounds with the volume shifts.

If you equalise the duration, um, it does not sound symmetrical anymore.

And in fact, it actually is quite hard to understand what English speakers are saying. If you do that, that, perversely,

might lead you to think that what was happening in Latin biology or what is happening in English approach is not so different.

After all, is duration, or the quantity of time that a syllable is held might in fact be in English too, at least in modern English.

Perhaps it wasn't true in the past. So that's a whole other set of questions.

How we can try to reconstruct historical pronunciation might have been the case that for Shakespeare,

the same syllables were stressed, but the stress was somehow performed differently even in modern English speakers American English,

Australian English, British English, and all the many other kinds of global English that there are actually do use

slightly different vocal techniques for making the stress out of stressed.

Now in poems. In some cases, stress is introduced by metre, in other words, once where a few lines into a poem we have,

we will happily and usually unconsciously alter the prose pronunciation of a phrase to produce the metrical pattern that the poet has established.

Um. So in Keats's melancholy ode, for example, we will add and hide the green hill in an April shroud and hides the green hill.

It should be green hill. In normal English, it's not Green Hill like Thornhill in a park or ride, but we end up saying it a bit as if it is,

or by ruin choirs where late the sweet birds sang and sweet birds sang.

Which one is dominating there as it really is? Birds really less stressed than sweet and sung sweet birds.

Normally you might think of the birds as the more stressed.

One way to think about those, those kind of not as as a sort of metrical complexity as a relative,

some ambiguity or over stressing that produces a particular effect.

But most of the time in English, that's quite rare. You have to make use of the stresses that normal birds already have.

So what's that? How do we know? In normal English, not poetry, English, just normal spoken English.

Um. Which syllables? Distressed and unstressed. How do children learn it?

How to second language speakers learn it well, actually with children they don't tend to get stressed wrong.

They make other kinds of errors of speech all the time. You know, they model words up.

They don't know words. They make cute little phrases of their own that sometimes one of my sons used to talk about,

um, I do instead of Iris, which I thought was quite with quite sweet.

Lots of kids make up phrases like that all the time. Um, they make errors of tense a lot in the past English past tenses, um, even,

you know, into secondary school children are still sometimes getting things wrong.

But they. I don't think I've ever heard a child miss stress a word I have heard adults neither myself, Mr. Words.

But then you she was it. You've just seen in books that you've not done properly in the in the normal way,

or all foreign words where there's some sort of ambiguity and we can also, with a pretty high degree of accuracy, teach a computer how to do this.

I mean, if we couldn't, you wouldn't.

To understand Siri or Alexa, you wouldn't be able to get in voice reader or any other kind of software to read aloud a text that you've written.

Actually, for practising poets, that's a pretty helpful way sometimes to check that the stress in your poem is functioning as you intended it to you.

If. If a computer reads out it was solid, it sounds like a solid for its sort.

So are you bending the words into shape or expecting the reader to sort of force things?

Um, it really is stressed in the correct way. Um, but how does this, these thing pears like Green Hill or Sweet Birds?

Um, so long as men can breathe this, um, this is a this is the the the being stressed on the other syllable.

Lots of like behind. Um. Here.

I meant to show. Show you that in what is what is going on.

I hope today brings lots of happiness in everything you do.

Making a 70 about 70th birthday. Simply wonderful.

Happy 70th birthday. Um, now this is this is like, barely an example of us.

Um, but it is possible that delineation is meant to make you think of it as being an example of us.

Hope today brings lots of happiness in everything you do, making your 70th birthday simply wonderful and true.

Or something the poet might have written. Um, greeting cards, I guess.

Um, like your monarchs are one of the only places where you see if you want to a lot of really, really bad verse being written.

Okay. Um. So, um, stressed syllables have clear um in one sense clear as in we know it when we hear it, but composite so mingled.

It's not really one thing. It's, um, in the acoustic signal, some combination of length of intensity and a pitch.

Now, on the, uh, when I say that length or duration can be phonemic in English, I think this is important.

And it might be one of the reasons why length is actually, in my opinion, the most important of these three things.

So do you know what a phoneme is? So a phoneme is the smallest unit.

In speech that makes a word. The word it is.

Um, so something like birth, uh, is a phoneme in English.

And Burton performed the minimal pairs a bit and pet.

Whereas there are other things you could do.

You could say in English, you could say Pitt or Pitt plays a role, but aspirating it or not aspirating it.

When I say in in Greek you have two letter P's, one is going to sound and one is just a p sound.

We could put as much h or not h as we wanted into the word pet, but it's not going to change the meaning of it.

But as soon as we allow our mouths to stray forwards with the lips of the label BA, then we've changed the meaning.

So um, so length bit and beat a and e, there's the same vowel sound you can see, um, written with uh, the long um syllable afterwards.

So the long vowel sound, um makes actually a different word.

But I don't think that, you know, if you say a word more loudly, it doesn't it doesn't change its meaning.

I at least can't think of any examples of words. Maybe there are some complex or foreign words, but where a change in the pitch in English,

or obviously in other languages that is true will change the meaning.

So two main types of stress. So lexical stress is stress that belongs to words, but it only works if the words have more than one syllable.

Um, this stress is basically fixed. There do seem to be some sort, some rules that govern govern it, but they um, I'll not absolute on the whole,

if you when you're learning English, you have to learn where this dress comes. With the language.

Um. So you might think about your first names.

Who's got a first name? How do many people have a first name? That's a monosyllable.

Yeah, it's actually quite like that. You your name as on your birth certificate.

How many people have a two syllable name? Yeah, so do I.

As a probably the majority. Okay. So of the people with the two.

So just put your hands up so I can see probably the two syllable name people hands.

Right. Hi, Leah. Okay. Um, how many of you keep your hands up if the name is stressed on the first syllable?

What's going on? Okay.

I mean, I would I would stress that on the first syllable, but I'm guessing there could be different pronunciations of it.

Who else has got a name that stressed on the second syllable?

Yeah. Georgia, I would say, is the first syllable.

Is there anyone who's got a name that's just on the second syllable? I know a lot of the names, like Celine or something.

Um, there are some. There are some sort of French names or borrowed names, and it almost all two syllable names in English.

Um, so. Or first names. In fact, nouns, syllable nouns on the whole tend to be stressed on the first syllable,

so it's a little hard and fast rule by any means, but it's sort of a useful sort of working.

Um. So here we go. So kind of a Chloe Pablo quasi.

It doesn't you know the in some women words about him from other languages.

Um, I don't know, Pablo, how you would say that.

Um, in Spanish and Italian, but, um, in English it's just on the first syllable.

So names to an awful lot of English writers Shakespeare, Dickens, Milton, Wordsworth.

You know, you could you could carry on, um, cities, London, Paris, places, Europe, Asia.

Um, there's a proper nouns, but also common nouns. Apple, coffee, lecture person.

I'm sure you can think of a million more. And also compound nouns.

Handout. Blackbird. Teapot.

Bedroom. What's the difference between a blackbird and a blackbird?

Yeah. So? Right.

So. And actually female blackbirds on black. Right. They're sort of like a brownish colour.

So you could say not all blackbirds are blackbirds, and some blackbirds are not blackbirds like crows or ravens or various other.

Um, that's actually quite an important point. And it's quite a it takes us back to the and hides the green hill, we should say green Hill, black bird.

Um, the reason for that. Uh. Come on. Wait a minute. That's prosodic stress.

That's happening because of the syntactic relationship between those two words.

Because those one is a noun and the other is an adjective that is modifying it.

And because the noun is coming in English, the normal English word, or is.

Second, when we make a compound, something different happens and we put the stress upfront at the beginning.

Blackbird t bedroom. Um.

Okay. So. Blackbird. Blackbird. Sweet bread.

Sweet bread. Greenhouse. Yeah. A greenhouse is a house made of glass.

And it's never green in colour. A greenhouse is not a greenhouse.

Probably think of some other. Other examples.

Shakespeare, I believe, is the person who came up where they were first recorded in.

Right. Anyway, the one bedroom and it has been a feature of English that over time,

I think the more and more noun compounds have been added to something definitely, that British visitors to America, um,

noticed in the 19th century that the Americans would love that, um, compounds, you know,

often making up sort of slightly technical or mechanistic words, you know, like for jobs items, you know, products that you could buy.

Um, it may be the case that one of the reasons one metre is actually harder to do for 20th

century buyers is because noun compounds are a real headache that they're hard to fit in.

Um, that's the stress is sort of awkwardly poised. Um, so to sort of all verbs have often the opposite pattern.

This is by no means like you're choosing many typical verbs that aren't like this.

But again, we get back to the idea of of a minimal pair.

And this shows something. This is not, um, about duration being phonemic, but this stress itself can be phonemic.

But sometimes we can have the same word, and if we put the stress on the first syllable,

it actually means something different from if we put it on the second syllable, it would be a good idea.

I mean, it's fun to try and make lists of these words if you can think of any more of them.

So I gave you a present. Um, tomorrow I'll present you with an award.

Present, present. It's like blackbird.

Blackbird. We still talk a lot about recording.

Um, we talk less nowadays about records. Um, we have old fashioned, um, records.

Um, torment. Probably the less common pronunciation.

Ali. Is it in four Quartettes has to be stressed like that. Torment.

The verbal form is is more common. I'm sure you can.

You can try and think of some, some others. But this is a place where the moving the stress around changes the meaning of the word.

Um, so, so, um, what is so important and so fixed that they already actually includes it as part of the definition.

Um. So. Outlook. Um, as a as a noun, you can see that the.

I don't really think that the verb outlook is very common. I wouldn't really use it, but, um, it seems like there's a verb in the court of the old.

You can see, you can you see there's like, um, a small sort of apostrophe before the top of the phonetic writing,

before the, uh, the A, which is the classic transcription phonetic alphabet of how you say that.

So the apostrophe says that the next syllable with the stressed one was in the verb.

You get the apostrophe before the l, you see, it's very small.

Um, but anyway, it's quite useful to go to the OED if you want to, but always useful.

But if you want to find out how a word is pronounced, or just check your, you know,

sense of whether where the stress falls, especially perhaps if it's an arcade word or a sort of unfamiliar word.

Um, so, you know. Okay, so the, the last the topic for today, um, is, is this second kind of stress, prosodic stress.

Um, so the things which I have seen, I now can see no more.

Some of the things which I have seen. I now can see no more now than the know arguably is a little little on the stress side,

but I don't think we have any difficulty saying that the things things is more stress than the.

Yeah. Can see that the sea is more stressed than the calm that some one element has dominated.

Over the other element. So prosodic stress.

Um, this, this idea of the nuclear stress rule is one that I actually when I was at university, I never heard of, um,

one of these talked about really very widely in English studies or I don't think it was formulated and clearly until,

um, Chomsky and Harlow in 1968, in a syntactic phrase with more than one content, were the last content word receives the strongest stress.

Um. So long live this. And this gives life to the.

Now, if you want to read about this in linguistics, you can see these very complex kind of branching diagrams where you will get

a short phrase like so long in which the long is more stressed than the so.

And then as you start to build up longer and longer units, the stress is kind of getting downgraded.

So long is still more stressed than so, but it's not nearly as just as as the we saw that um, visually on the, on the exam.

So as an example, um, of how this builds up, you might say that I went out.

So the preposition I went out is the most trustworthy. Is that right?

You know, I went, I went out, I went out to the shops.

I really I should have probably went out with some sort of small. Caps because out is still more stress than won't.

It's more stress than I, and I would say it's more stress than two.

And the but it is not a stress is shops. I went out to the shops.

I went out to the shops this morning. I agree that no morning is more stressed than.

Shops, which is more stressed than. Out. I went out to the shops this morning to buy a cake.

I mean knows everything about the cake is more stressed than. Morning.

The things, the words of line, the things which I have seen.

Now you might say that the eye is trust, but the me just doesn't say the things which.

And then the new phrases which I have seen, I now can see.

And then the final word no more and I no more, I think is difficult in terms of its stress, because it is something of a compound.

Um, is is. Yes. No, no. But anyway, both symbols of stress and no naturally, of course, also has a long vowel sound in it.

Which is why. No no no not leave. No, no, that opening is it say, of the melancholy.

It is also quite awkward. Um, what you can imagine is that if you're writing, iambic pentameter is where the full stop comes at the end of the line.

Is there very often do. What you're doing is you're tending to tally the place.

Whether linguistic stress is the most pronounced as the end of the sentence with the end of the line,

and then you get a kind of concord of metrical stress.

The line and drew this place where Wordsworth says, you have to pause and sentence level stress,

and sometimes you do the opposite and say, one of the reasons why, you know, blank verse,

why I say something like Paradise Lost has the really strange and kind of unnatural, um,

and haunting effects that it does is because you, you sometimes you have this, this coinciding.

So the full stop comes at the line and and sometimes it doesn't when it doesn't want you to be lurches over,

then we have offset that you that you principles. Um.

So we'll see. Crescendo breaks. I went out the shop to the shop this morning to buy a cake for my son's birthday party.

That's the longest version of the sentence. I think it'd be hard to continue.

You could say I went out to the shops and buy cake for my son's birthday party,

which was, um, his third or something, and then the third would have the most stress.

But basically, once you get to the end of the sentence, everything resets and then you're starting again.

From the beginning. Um, there is a bit of a puzzle about how it is the case that you.

What does the volt keep in reserve? You know, how do you see if this link works that best?

You're had me. I thought you was getting to be a lady. It's going to be a pleasure to give you a lesson in marksmanship.

You couldn't give me a lesson in long distance, Spence.

Anything you can do, I can do better. I could do anything better than you.

Oh. You can. Yes, I can. Oh, yeah. Can. Yes I can. No you can't.

Yes I can. Yes I can. Anything you can be I can be right there.

Sooner or later I'm greater than you. No you're not.

Yes I am. No you're not. Yes I am. No you're not. Yes. That, uh, the Reverend Ray Middleton singing.

Anything you can do, I can do better. Annie, get your gun.

I mean, how does the. What does the voice have to keep in reserve to keep on adding adding more stress.

Um. I think one tentative answer to that, and this is the answer, is I was already starting to give.

It is puzzling and counterintuitive to those people who, like me, were raised.

On Latin poetry and on the idea of a fundamental difference between English and Latin.

Um, that's one of the reasons why in the Renaissance, imitating Latin didn't work is because duration is very important and you can see how loudness,

I mean, we all have limits to how loudly we can shout, will have definitely limits to how high we can sing.

Um, but I guess it is limited only by, you know, breath.

Or if you're willing to take a breath and carry on to some extent by life itself, how long you're willing to.

To hold a syllable. Um, okay.

So one final, um, very small point.

Um, I think that this is, is not as important as the point so far.

There is also there's lexical stress, stress on words. We learn it with a language.

It only happens on words of more than one syllable.

There's prosodic stress, which applies to lexically stressed words because the lexically stressed words in a longer sentence.

You know, it was my birthday party birthday. It doesn't change the lexical stress on that.

What? The prosodic stress just decides how stressed birthday is relative to the other things around it.

Birthday cake is like a de facto. It's not written as a compound word, it's not written as one word, but it functions like one.

It's the birthday is come, come up front. That is the more stressed element.

Um, but in addition to solving stress, um, and lexical stress, both of which are always in operation unless you literally just head up on the list.

I think some of you,

one of the lectures last week might have had the example of Stanley Fish and his his list of names that the students in the lecture thought were poem.

Um, I mean, all kinds of reasons, of course, why that couldn't be a Renaissance religious poem.

Um, but one would be the incredibly monotonous pattern that would list pronunciation.

Just nothing dominates. There is no prosodic stress in the list.

More lighting doesn't really have more prominence than the. Or it doesn't in the same way as it does in normal speech.

But we also sometimes use so-called stress. Um, so that first year had me.

I thought you was guest. Okay. So this slide, um, so.

Can you imagine why anyone would ever say throw is by Ted Hughes?

It's in fact Ted Hughes. First names always play this role of the lost element is more stressed.

The real normal pronunciation is Ted Hughes. But why would you say Ted Hughes?

I mean, maybe someone thought was by Langston Hughes or something. So you'll pick his.

Someone makes a mistake, you say, no, no, this is my Langston Hughes. It's by Ted Hughes.

Um, it's only a little present. You don't get your hopes up too much in writing.

You often use italics or capitalisation to, to mark this.

Um, it emphasises which words are unexpectedly important in terms of the information structure.

Um, so my my last line for today is, um, Shakespeare's Sonnet 42.

So this is an interesting poem. I think it, um.

Immediately proceeds. Um, another poem that plays a lot with pronouns 43.

One that has all days and nights to C till I see v.

He is the most dressed. And nights bright days when dreams to show the me so the that's the next burn.

Um. Both this pair of friends 42 and 43 poems about paradoxical situation is about

um in the second situation why why Night-Time might be preferable today?

Because the beloved is absent during daytime. Dreams can bring them back at night.

Uh, 42 is about jealousy, about the loss of a woman to a friend, and then the loss of a friend now that he's preoccupied with the missed woman.

Um, this is even more complicated things with pronouns, so we'll need to ask him.

In linguistics. Um, this this poem, uniquely in Shakespeare's sonnets, was on metrical.

Uh, I that's that's really quite wrong.

It's just that the you went to put the stress in places that you wouldn't normally to emphasise the meaning that thou hast her.

It is not all my grief. So the linguists were worried about.

Why is it not that thou hast to come? And yet it may be said, I loved her dearly, that she has Z.

Is of my waiting, chief. You can see what's happening that she has.

Not me, sadly, but the, um.

A loss in love that touches me more than. If I lose thee.

My losses, my love's gain. I'm losing her.

My friend has found that loss. Both find each other.

And I lose both Twain. And both for my sake.

Lay on me this cross. Here's the joy, my friend and I have one.

Sweet flattery. Then she loves but me alone.

Um, so next time we'll look at the way that poets organise sequences of stressed syllables,

runs of stress, syllables sometimes of the same length and sometimes of different lengths into lines.

And we'll talk much more than we do today about how meta shapes of poems meaning some of you, I mean, sorry, Econs.

We were doing, um, Tennyson last week. Um, what did Matthew Arnold mean when he told Tennyson that three lines of the monologue,

dramatic monologue Ulysses took up nearly as much time as a whole book of the Iliad.

These were the lines. Yet all experiences and art were through line break gleams that untroubled world whose margin fades forever and forever.

When I move west through gleams something is happening.

And whether the way through um catches, holds on to.

And it's a let's go with gleam the meaning of the next line that it creates an immense dilation,

I think, in in time and space when you when you're reading it.

So we'll talk more about about those effects, how poets manipulate them.

Um, and then after the lecture on lines, which was a little bit quite a general level,

the third and fourth lecture will be about specifically more historical,

about specific metres and how to recognise them, what content they're associated with and how poets use them.

Um, I don't know if anyone has any questions, but I'll stick around here for a minute or so.

Um, if you do. Thank you.

