[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
Hello, everybody. Can you hear me? Okay. Thanks for coming back.

I think I must have given a very boring lecture last week, because quite a lot of the audience has gone there.

That always happens at Oxford. Um, I have one announcement, um,

which is that anyone who is interested in contemporary poetry might like to come to

an event that is taking place in the Um Avada Studios on Ozone Island on Thursday.

Um, so I'm going to read some poems, but so, um, some other, much younger and more exciting poets like Camille Ralph's in the TLS.

Um, okay, so last time we talked about iambic metres and we talked about lines.

Um, today I want to talk about non-Olympic metres, um, which are important but less common in English.

Um, and a bit about Rhine.

And into all of that, I'm hoping to weave, um, a little bit more close reading of actual poems, um, than in the, the first two lectures.

Okay. Um, but I'll, I'll start where I ended last time.

Um, so it said that for many critics, being in lines is more or less a definition of what verses Charles Hartman verse is language in lines, um,

or Jeremy Bentham, the founder of utilitarianism, who put it even more briskly when he said when the lines run all the way to the right margin.

It's prose. When this fails to happen, it's verse fails isn't interesting with it.

Um, we did note a few exceptions.

Um, there are some prosaic genres, like adverts, um, plum trees, potted meat lists, uh, bullet points in a PowerPoint, slides, obviously.

Um, they're delineated. And we said that at least sometimes in the past, uh, in Greece, for example,

or the Old English poems in the Exeter Book, um, verse was written out as prose.

But we ended with an example from Wordsworth, um, who began his great long poem, The Prelude.

I said. In the middle of a line rather than at the start of one.

He wanted to start with this sentence. Was it for this, that one?

The fairest of all rivers love to blend his murmurs with my nurse's song.

And from his all the shades. And rocky falls. And from his forwards and shallows.

Sent a voice that flowed along my dreams.

It's a crucial question, an existential puzzle, and tonally, perhaps a gauge to its dissappointed resolve.

So, um, on the right hand side is a piece of calligraphic art.

I put this up partly because the, um,

I couldn't get an image of the manuscript page itself without the colours on the street because the grass mill site where it's hosted is down.

But you can see, um, at the very top, was it? And then the blue over the top.

So this, this actually was made by an artist about ten years ago called Money Link for an exhibition, um, that colours and their forms,

artist responses to words within a lot of the artworks produced were scroll coloured manuscripts like this,

of course, um, manuscripts of a kind that, at least at this period, right, has never produced.

But was it for this? You can see it shoved right over to the right hand side of the page.

That one. Um, so one of the things that was it had to do when he went on to complete the poem and that you would read it,

is a very short fragment that you already did very short, was to get up to this point.

So now there are 250 lines or so. Um, in other words, the poem starts somewhere else and makes its way back to its original starting point.

Um, so why couldn't he have written it out like this?

Was it for this, that one? The fairest of. I mean, you might think one isn't that.

And I am back with him. Was it for this, that one?

The fair rest of, um.

Why do you think that this might not have worked or why?

Why would it? It probably never occurred to him to even consider this.

I mean, I think probably, um, it's the word of is one of the problems.

I think it's the only problem.

Um, it's not that uncommon for poets to end lines with prepositions when those prepositions are used as part of a verb form.

So plenty of Shakespeare's sonnets, um, have a word like out at the end.

Oh, how shall summer's honey breath hold out? Um, but this kind of of of fairies, of all rivers worthy of, um, is linking to a noun that follows.

I don't think we can find that little word at the end of the line.

It's a word that could just about be considered stressed in the middle of the line.

If you remember, we said last time that you can't put stressed syllables in Arabic pentameter in unstressed places,

but you can put unstressed syllables in stressed places.

That seems to work other than at the end of the line, where you need a a properly stressed syllable.

Um, so, um. This is what he preferred.

Um, I don't imagine it was really, though, that he thought. Oh, I want to say this.

I want to think about how I would look if it was written down. Was it for this, that one the fairest of?

And then thought, oh no, that doesn't work, I'll have to try again.

In fact, a lot of words with structures written down by dictation. So, um, he could have tried to rewrite, I suppose, in various ways.

Was it for this, that one? The Ferris stream with a more solid word at the end of the line?

Um, but I think the one is a little different one,

that it's by putting this a word that threatens with demonstrative pronoun to be not all that important, it's by putting it at the line end.

That is really important is sort of a haunting importance of the poem as a whole, because what was the question asking?

But. Was all of that stuff in the boss, all of the spots of time, my childhood, everything that mattered to me.

Did that just lead up to this? Or this is the disappointments, the incompleteness, the qualifications of that, the present as much more.

Poignancy and more of an existential horror when the syllable is at the the line.

And so you might remember in the first lecture I quoted a letter from um.

Um, from Wordsworth, um, about the need to to pause at the end of the line.

Um, Pope to um will come onto paper in a minute.

Um, notes notes that every Nicaea must, I believe, have observed that in any smooth English verse of ten syllables,

there's naturally pause at the fourth, fifth, or sixth.

Um, I said in the first lecture that often in Shakespeare, the significant pauses at the fourth or the sixth.

So organising it this way, was it for this, that one? Um, actually does something slightly strange to that to you because it creates a pretty strong.

Pause in the sound caesura after two syllables, um, before the you see, to blend his murmurs for and from his older shades,

and from his folds and shallows six before reverts to the normal pattern.

I guess when I read student essays, there's often when people talk about, um, on one, which they do quite a lot.

A tendency to dwell on the ways that, um, Jamal disrupts the line, um,

creating either a feeling of unseemly haste or sometimes tremendously dragging slowness,

especially if a verb is separated from the noun um, that it governs.

Um, but I do think that, especially in metrical verse, that that is by any means the most important or the most frequent.

Useful. Um. More often.

It's actually used to. To donate a little bit of extra stress, a bit of extra emphasis to reinforce something.

Um, now in free verse, um, we might admire the effectiveness of a particular line break.

I say that works really well. Um, but it would be difficult, I think, to say that the poem could have admitted no alternative.

And in a practical sense, if you look at the manuscript or now nowadays maybe TypeScript or computed documents of free verse writers,

you'll see they often play with delineation until very late in the game, sometimes after the poem has been published,

even, um, a metrical part that would be very, very difficult, usually impossible.

So another way, lines in metrical poetry aren't something added to the oral meaning.

A good linear motion isn't an elegant solution to transcribing a poem.

Um, the line break isn't, as one poet puts it, describing free verse.

A way to sample and re sample the acoustic contours of the line.

It's not something superimposed on a linguistic unit of meaning that usually exceeds the chosen line length.

Um, why is that important? Well, one of the things I want to say today is we look at Turkic and ternary metres.

So metres with a kind of extra skipping beat, um, and a past dactyl.

Is that the syntax, the syntactic structures, the ideas, those kinds of problems admit in English are just different, um, from iambic poems.

Um, but just a couple of words about free verse. So Ezra Pound said that finding the right form for free,

free verse poem was about finding rhythm that was entirely a man's dead man's own, their own counterfeiting on counterfeit bill.

What does he mean by that? Uh, he calls this vagrant measure, absolute rhythm.

Um, so the absolute part seems to consist in fidelity to the individual, to the exactness,

the specificity of your emotion, your experience that you want to write about.

And the idea is that you're going to write your poem with a rhythmic pattern,

a prosodic pattern that is completely new that no one has ever used before in any other poem in English.

And it correctly really. He also says it would be, um, counterfeit, although it might be easy enough to imitate.

Um, I like verse even. It would be extremely difficult to produce another poem in the same prosodic with the same prosodic emphases.

I think it's any free verse poem, even a really short one, even in a station metro.

That will be hard. Um, otherwise is the 19 tens.

When free first was first being justified, they didn't try to justify it on the basis of the sounds better.

Um, they tried to justify it on the basis of essentially political arguments about individualism.

So Richard Aldington, um, major antagonist of T.S. Eliot's writing The Egoist,

said the old accented verse and metrical verse forced the poet to abandon some of his individuality,

most of his accuracy and all his style in order to wedge his emotions into some pre-conceived and sometimes childish formality.

Free verse permits the poet all his individual algebras.

He creates his cadence instead of copying other people's same idea.

Um. D.H. Lawrence, another eager writer in free verse, um,

used a military metaphor 4 or 5 years later in the preface to a new collection of his own poems, yet at the same point.

Um, so this is just after the First World War. Free verse tows no melodic line, no matter what, drill sergeant.

But we cannot positively prescribe any motion, any rhythm.

The law must come new each time from within.

But in magical poetry, the poetry that these people are opposing upon begins in its lines.

And as we said last time, its grammatical units, the building blocks of its syntax, call for or maybe dictate.

That's a chicken and egg problem if there was one lines of a particular kind.

Um, so last time we looked at the most basic, most common metres in English.

Um, the iambic ones. Um, I said that they work in part because they make use of patterns that are already, um, present in our speech.

You know, shall I compare thee to someone's day to be or not to be? That is the question.

Um, those lines survive pretty well.

Even now they sound fairly conversational. Um, it's not, of course, by the way, that those lines shall I compare V to a summer's day,

have a definite rhythm or a different phrase like today is a gloomy day in November doesn't.

It does have a definite rhythm. Um. From everything I said about stress in the first lecture.

If I were you or someone speaking English in a different part of the world with a different accent from either of us,

says that phrase a gloomy day in November. Um, they're going to be putting emphasis in the same places.

And as I said before, we can show that I might show you some images of this to prove it in the last lecture,

um, with linguistic analysis tools like Praat.

Um, but it's really hard to generate more phrases if you think it's a gloomy day in November.

If you wanted to generate another phrase that had exactly the same pattern for us logically, is that one?

Can anyone think of anything, uh, gloomy?

Day in November. We could argue about how important the length of the vowels is, how important the word breaks are.

I mean, you could try, you know, the handsome man in the photo and insignificant detail.

Insignificant detail. It's always got the ending of the hexameter.

Um, but I think it would be very, very difficult to imagine doing that repeatedly.

I'm not sure that it would be easy to do it with anything that wasn't essentially a noun phrase.

Um, I don't think you could put those together, um, to create something that would sound so mellifluous.

So there's something about the patterning of Shakespeare's phrase,

shall I compare thee to a summer's day that we find more attractive, more memorable, and more salient?

Um, perhaps because it's more symmetrical, perhaps because it more closely resembles other basic kinds of rhythm by which we live and move.

People often talk about the heartbeat. Um, we might think of the rhythm of walking.

Um, many poets besides Wordsworth have composed for walking.

Maybe in some way we have an aesthetic preference. A very basic one for binary oscillations.

But secondly, it's it's easier to make a wide variety of complex statements in this part.

We're not stuck to a noun phrase. Handsome man in the photo.

Gloomy day in November. Um, partly because the English is already prone to making iambic patterns and adjusting words and phrases to fit them.

In this sense, as I said last time, English music is a stylisation.

This is really important formalisation of patterns that are already abundant in the spoken language.

Um. The Russian linguist Victor Human Ski puts this clearly in a preface to a German reprint of his Russian monograph on rhyme.

Converse is not the violation of language. And if you've gotten to that topic yet in the paper one lectures.

But that is a of his first argument that was made very often by Russian formalists.

Um, but it's one that's echoed throughout the century. The idea that the verse that poetry somehow, um, disrupts, um,

runs counter to normal language is not the violation of language, is the old remark of the Russian formalist at it,

but an aesthetically and historically conditioned selection from the phonetic means of a national language,

aesthetically, in historically conditioned selection. Um.

Okay. So, um, this is just, um. This is printed from an article in it by Bruce Hayes and others.

Um, a well-known prize winning article in linguistics where, um, the writers try to compare,

um, iambic pentameter, writing in Shakespeare's sonnets and in Paradise Lost.

Um, to me, it was a somewhat of a misguided study, because the writers didn't seem to think at the beginning that writing iambic pentameter,

when it's rhymed, um, as it is in sonnets, might just be different in kind from when it's on rhymed.

It might allow you to do different things. So they compared them as if they were the same.

Um, uh, it would have made to me more sensitive compared to, say, the blank verse of Shakespeare's plays.

But I think that this, um, the pentameter template,

that's quite a useful diagram for showing just how people in linguistic sports basically think about this now five feet.

Each one is divided into two parts. Um, the poets task, they say quite well.

They can be stated in the most general terms, as it doesn't really probably feel like this if you sit down to write a poem.

But, um, construct lines whose phonological structure evokes the metre.

Um, and that's easy to do in English. Um, because lots and lots of phrases already have this form logical structure.

Okay. So we start looking at the way in which the basic feet combine.

So it also we we did iambs. Now we're going to go on to do these others.

Um okay. So all of the meteors that we're going to look at now place more constraints on expression, I think, than dynamic metre.

So they're harder to compose in, and perhaps none more so than the almost unused archaic true metre.

Um. Shelley's Um to Skylark is one of the better known poems that is sometimes said to be in this metre, and a lot of it is,

um, but many lines are irregular, and the last line of each stanza gives up entirely on the pattern.

Say, hail to thee, Blithe Spirit.

But, uh, never what? So that we've got a syllable skipped off at the end, that from heaven or near it, that we try to.

Poorest by full heart. Again, a syllable skipped at the end that's called cattle lactic.

And then what happens in the final line? In profuse strains of unpremeditated art.

Um, so the last line of each stanza gives up entirely on the pattern to produce in a poem otherwise about the birds ineffable ungraspable,

um, powers of song. A strangely definite conclusion, as if the human speaker has tired of approaching the mysterious creature,

the skylark, with breathless reverence, and sort of wants to whine things up.

Um, after the very short lines attributed to Cadillac tech.

Then each stanza is ending with a hexameter overlong, overfull meta with all of its possibilities for reprise and repetition.

Of course, it's also two trumpeters and singing still left still to soar and soaring ever since August, and you almost never get to see this metre.

So, um, I'm going to leave that one there. Um, the titular metre is much more important.

It's by far the most common metre in English.

Um, I think when I was a child, the best known example, um, would have been Longfellow's 1855 poem The Song of Hiawatha.

Maddeningly repetitive, um, and strangely hypnotic attempt to write a kind of epic pre-history for America.

Um, but that's fallen out of fashion. Now, a state sponsored government website and National Park Service notes it was an immediate success,

propelling Longfellow into literary stardom and influencing popular culture for decades to come.

Uh, in this epic work, Longfellow set out to honour Native American heritage,

but simultaneously perpetuated stereotypes and the false assertion that indigenous culture was dying in America.

Since then, the merits and pitfalls of Hiawatha have been widely debated, as its hold on American culture endures.

Now, Longfellow himself thought that by writing in this meta, he was um.

Although overtly people, critics at the time said he was he was writing in a medium more familiar from Finnish,

um, from the um Kalevala, the Finnish epic narrative problem.

He thought by writing in this metre he was able to give some of the rhythmical possibilities,

some of the rhythmic sense, um, of Native American poetry.

I don't know if that was is true or not. Um, but you will see that there is in this poem as often in children's verse two um,

very heavy reliance on correctly shaped Polish syllables, of which Hiawatha, um is the one repeated most frequently and often.

There's a certain illogic, even if I have no realism about these these Polish syllables.

So what is it at the door on some evenings that the little Hiawatha, uh, the whispering of the pine trees, heard the lapping of the waters.

Sounds of music, words of wonder. Minnehaha was at the pine trees, Madawaska said.

The water. Well, of course they did. I mean, they would have to say something that is is tricky, right?

Midnight Wawa otherwise. But if you look at the line endings, one of the problems of writing in this form, you can see,

is you always start with ending with a two probability syllable word with a falling pattern.

As we said, 91% of verbs have two syllables of stress on the second.

So you basically start with ending with a bunch of nouns, but not monosyllabic nouns.

Evenings pine trees, waters wander, and then we get again pine trees and water.

Um, presumably because the total set of nouns that you could use is so restricted.

That's one of the problems of writing in this metre.

So I think probably because of this problem, um, you do often find that when when writers are writing in this form,

they actually choose to skip off the final syllable. So we would still call that a, um, spectrometer.

And we'll come on to that in a second. Um, but then it's called Cat electric.

So you might say that this some people would say Doctor Seuss, a lot of doctors.

He says, in fact, from A to one fish, two fish, red fish, blue fish.

Uh, it's only because of the listing pronunciation might otherwise say blue fish.

Blue fish, we say to distinguish it from the other colours that come before.

Um, so in other cultures, especially in Finnish, it seems to jump to is used for long ones.

But those other cultures have words with really different shapes and have different kinds of grammar from English.

In English, it's primarily a lyric metre, and that's mostly because it's just too difficult to keep it going for very long.

Um, it's the meat of the song from symbolism that plays out in Mrs. Dalloway.

Did it matter then she also said if walking towards Bond Street, did it matter that she must inevitably cease completely?

All this must go on without her? Did she resent it, or did it not become consoling to believe that death ended?

Absolutely. But what was she dreaming as she looked into her shop window?

What was she trying to recover? What image of white Dawn in the country as she read in the book spread open?

Why? Ask yourself there what the rhythm of the prose is? Actually, it's quite, quite poetic prose, isn't it?

But is there some way in which the prose image of white Dawn in the country might be starting to approach,

to kind of pave the ground for the other Shakespeare song that follows Vietnam, or The Heat of the sun, nor the furious winter's rages.

Say, here's a poem kind of handy for PowerPoint slides when you can find a poem on the underground, there's the formatted in the the same shape.

Obviously, PowerPoint slides in the opposite shape from from book pages, um, or from notebook pages.

So sometimes putting your lectures displaying text can be difficult for animal.

The heat of the sun nor the furious winter's rages.

Thou thy worldly task has done. Homer.

Gone and taken my wages. So that line the wages is a potentiometer.

But the early lines, Walden, because his rages son and Don have a they've managed to end with a monosyllable.

So that adds a lot of variety to what you can do. Golden lads and girls, almost as chimney sweepers come to dust.

But there is still a very heavy reliance on words with the right shape,

lexical stresses of the right kind to kind of ground and anchor the metre to make sure it keeps going is a furious winter.

Winter's whirls. The golden, especially chimney sweep is very useful.

Um, compound noun. It's also the metre of Don Donne's, uh, lovely song.

Um, probably. No, this won't go and catch a falling star. Get with Child and Mandrake Root.

Tell me where all past years are. Or who clef the Devil's flute.

Teach me to hear mermaids singing. Or to keep off and stinging.

And find what wind serves to advance an honest mind.

Presumably it was originally pronounced wind and never quite sure if I want to go for that or not.

Um. It's lovely. No. Not because of its absurd conviction, um, that finding a constant and attractive woman is a near impossibility.

Um, that's silly and, uh, misogynistic.

But because of the beauty and the inventiveness of the task that it conceives of as an impossibility, and I do not want to use the classical term.

So this idea was quite common in the period. Um, it the poem was published, um, in 1633, two years after John's death,

but it's thought to have been written much earlier than that, and perhaps even in the last decade, um, of the previous century.

So this was the moment when Thomas Nash was writing in his Anatomy of Absurdity.

Democritus, the Greek philosopher, encountered a fair, chaste woman, a miracle of miracles,

so fair and just, um, a degree of immortality, a crown of triumph because she is so hard to be found.

Same idea here. Um, but the list of things that the speaker is meant to do in his effort to prove why his project is true is weird and beautiful.

So the meaning of the list of imperatives won't be completed until the next stanza after a hypothetical if clause.

Go and do these things, the speaker says. And even if you do, and that will take 27 years when you come back.

I already know what it would tell me. You couldn't find one faithful, faithful, beautiful woman doesn't exist.

But even if for some reason. And then we get a hypothetical nested inside a hypothetical inside this, I do not own structure.

Even if you're mad enough to tell me she does exist. I know that she would have already become unfaithful before I can meet her.

If you look at the list of things that no one can do, the childlike wish fulfilment of catching a falling star,

the disturbingly adult image of impregnating giving the child the form of mandrake root.

Then the distressing glimpse of something that is equally impossible, but which perhaps we all think it should be possible.

Tell me where all past years are. Let me get the slide to the cause while payslips are in nightmare.

Also a theological puzzle. Because surely the answer to this can't be God or the Devil's foot.

So this is a regular, I would say example of Dutch amateur in English.

But you notice some of the lines once again don't have the the normal number of eight syllables.

Obviously in lambic meat you really can't do that.

You can't just miss out the last syllable of lambic pentameter because that's the stressed syllable.

Here you can see this is called cattle lactic. Um.

Okay. You might also notice, actually, that, um. Fenimore.

The heat of the sun. Go and catch a falling star.

These poems begin with the same. Structure the same syntactic structure, so does audience.

Um. 20th century. Very beautiful poem. Lullaby. Um.

Also about a faithless lover. Lay your sleeping head, my love.

Human on my faithless um. Time and fevers burn away.

Individual beauty from thoughtful children. And the grave proves the child ephemeral.

What is that structure? Go and catch a falling star.

Feeling more the heat of the sun. It's imperative, isn't it?

And actually, you find that very often these potentiometer problems are imperative problems.

The problems of commands, um, problems where the, the you is involved in, in performing a series of things, um,

that the part wants once you do sometimes whether you turns out, realistically speaking to himself or herself.

Um, so beginning with the imperative. But Shunk also truncates the final syllables.

Um, to create a catalytic pattern also becomes ensnared in difficulties articulating the consequences of the paradox that he's articulately laid out.

Uh, again, we get a vast sweep of historical time.

Um, all thoughtful children lose their beauty, the problem says, and the grave proves that children are ephemeral.

Um. That's true, isn't it?

You were recently children. Where? Where are your children now?

They're not in the grave. But they might in a way be.

That's true for all of us with all our past lives. Um.

Either way, I think it's hard to avoid the feeling that these insistently echoing syllables in Auden's poem.

And the chain of imperatives, and done a hinting at a suggestive and distressing series of temporal impoverishment,

but without fully or candidly revealing their own position.

Time and fevers burn away. Individual beauty from thoughtful children and the grave proves the child ephemeral.

You might say, actually, in response to that, you need the grave to prove the child ephemeral.

The ordinary adult life proves that. Um, the protocol.

Phillips, um, has an interesting essay on this metre, and he sees that this, um.

Sort of a sense of temporal impoverishment, um, open ended, dissatisfied sort of feeling is really essential to it,

he says, because the key must always end on an unaccented syllable.

It has an open ended, unfinished sound suggestive of falling away that goes on indefinitely,

lacking as it does the stressed ending that would suggest finality or conclusion.

Um, there's also, I think, something quite impersonal about these speech structures that appealing to a common experience.

I think that's true for everybody. There's a heightened emotional pitch,

but it's not the heightened emotional pitch of writing to your beloved or talking about something dreadful that's just happened to you.

They tend to generality to maxims, truisms, universal.

By contrast, if you just think about ritual, some iambic pentameter tends to be both personal and rational, confident, pellucid.

Um, I think I said last time that if you only have one iambic pentameter poem in mind as a sort of template marvels to his core mistress,

um, as imperative, this would be a good example. Um, had we were old enough in time.

This coyness, lady one a crime. So I don't think there's a great deal more to say about your metres.

It would be interesting, and perhaps not too difficult to know what percentage of well known problems in English they describe.

And I say not too difficult, I mean not too difficult.

Now, in the age of AI, where I don't think it's the case at the moment that, say, GPT is very good at recognising metrical patterns at all.

But that's because it hasn't been trained on anything other than iambic metres.

It's been trained on Shakespeare's sonnets and a few other sonnets.

I think it would be possible for someone with a little bit more computing knowhow that I have,

but probably not massive expertise to train it to recognise other metres.

And then, of course, you could start to upload vast quantities of verse written over the last five centuries and ask it,

you know, what percentage is in trauma to what percentage is in pentameter?

No one has ever really been able to find out the answer to any of those questions.

Um, you could count the metrical types of poems in well-known anthology, I suppose, such as ball, graves, gold, and treasure.

If you do, that is below 10%. So you won't encounter this very often.

But if you in your finals, um, have a goblet, you know, quotation on the question paper that is in a metre,

try to try to remember this lecture and say something about it.

And it's always a good place to these close reading metres longer than diameter don't work out.

Pentameter isn't really found, uh, in hexameter, although it's common enough in other languages like Russian.

It seems that the metre barely struggles to be eight syllables, because a lot of the traumatic poems actually only have seven.

In that case. And this is just a little puzzled, you might ask, why does in the 19th century we suddenly start finding, um, poems like this?

Um, poems, intricate metres that are even longer, um, than pentameter, even longer than hexameter.

Is this cake? Comrades, leave me here a little.

What is yet is early morn. Tennyson's Locksley hall. Leave me here when you want me.

Sound upon the bugle horn. It sort of is, isn't it?

It's certainly not. Um.

But it seems possibly because of the length of the line, possibly because of the syntax and the words that Tennyson has chosen,

that there's a tendency here for alternate stresses to be skipped out, creating longer runs for four beat runs.

Comrades, leave me here a little while as yet. His early morn. Leave me here.

And when you want me send upon the bugle horn. It is magical.

I think you can hear its intensity, metrical singsong in some ways, but it is quite hard to say exactly what its structure is.

I think maybe in the last lecture you talked about an example of a hardy premise, that.

Right. Robert was telling me he went out. So I think that this is particularly common in the later 19th and early 20th century.

Um, now you might say, um, although I emphasised earlier that when people wanted to write free verse,

it was all for political reasons, it was all that big an individual. Possibly.

They also wanted to write free verse, because they were finding it harder than ever before to make the traditional metres of English work,

and their whole number of reasons why that might be.

At any rate, the period immediately before free verse is a period of massive metrical experimentation and an instability.

Um, Elizabeth Barrett Browning's a real political poem, The Cry of the children.

Um, it's another example of a poem like this, where there is a sort of tension between a two beat, really a four beat metre.

But I'm not going to say anything more about four beat metres. Let's go on to ternary metres.

So these metres that are based around a binary pattern, um, but a pattern where a stressed syllable occurs only 33% of the time.

Um, so there are in normal speech a lot more unstressed syllables and stressed ones.

So you might think that these metres would tend to naturalism.

It's probably true that they can more easily accommodate real estate.

Direct speech writers in iambic pentameter always have the problem of how can you put someone's actually talking into your problem?

Can you quote somebody? Bosworth gets past that discussion by saying, well, I people didn't speak like this,

but that's because they didn't have enough education to become poets.

So I will turn everything that they said, um, into a blank verse on their behalf.

And yeah, you just have to accept that.

Um, but in fact, I think it's true that these meetings actually seem to these are the triple feet more naturalistic as a whole?

Um, other than with quotations? Um, that's because, as we said before, unstressed syllables can so easily be promoted to stressed position.

But these these metres have become more common as English poetry has progressed.

And again, um, like these sort of wavering metres, the ones that could be resolvable in more than one way,

they're particularly common at the end of the 19th, the beginning of the 20th century. So.

Heart Is the Voice is a good example of a dactyl ic poem in English, as a poem about memory and absence,

but rather than contenting itself with memory, it plays various games with sound, trying to turn a vague noise back into a human voice.

So it begins confidently, not only in the sound of a dead woman's voice,

but in the promise of further restitution that her voice makes its her young voice.

Pam had a moment in the song recently after the publication of the anthology Poems That Make Grown Men Cry.

Seamus Heaney, pick this one.

I can't honestly say that I break down when I read The Voice, but when I get to the last four lines, the tear ducts do congest a bit.

Woman much missed are you? Call to me called me saying that now you are not as you were when you had changed from the one who was all to me,

but is at first when all day was fair.

So you can see here that again, we've got something that I guess we could call catalytic.

But now it's not just one unstressed syllable that's been emitted, but two.

So saying that now you are not as you three complete feet and then were just a single monosyllable.

These. These meetings are always, I think, less linear, less less regular, less straight up and down than iambic metres.

Um, I actually don't like metres for the same reason. Eight metres less common on big ones are slightly less common than on a plastic ones.

Um, some examples of these, um, might be Twas the Night Before Christmas or Yeats's poem White Birds.

I wished that we were my beloved white birds on the phone with the sea.

Um, but this is the same point that the Robert was making in the last lecture.

Um, I'm thinking different metres are profoundly different. You never confuse one for the other.

The kinds of things you say, the quantum effects. You create a totally different. Um, but that doesn't quite seem to be true for for the of metres.

So the dactyl and the unrest and never say far apart, as is all that, um, as a result, um,

where different sets of recurring structural patterns can be perceived in the same object that holds all of the ternary metres,

they're always on the verge of dissolving into each other. The voice starts with a strong stress.

The woman of woman much missed. That's why we call it dactyl.

It is. It gets off to that heavy start. But once you start saying it, does it really sound very different from the metre?

That ought to be its opposite. Um. So this.

Twas the night before Christmas, when all through the house not a creature was stirring, not even a mouse.

The stockings were hung by the chimney with care. In hopes that Saint Nicholas in with the children were nestled snug in their beds.

While visions of sugarplums danced in their heads. Were in her kerchief, and I and my cap had just settled our brains for a long winter's nap.

Um, the question of who wrote this poem is quite contested.

It was published anonymously in 1837, in an anthology of New York poets.

Um, and then afterwards, because it became wildly popular, um, as Christmas was, I suppose, beginning to be larger and more commercial.

Um, sorry. Um, um, festival. Lots of people tried to say that it was their firm, that they'd be the person who originally thought of it.

Um, is now usually thought to have been written by a biblical scholar, Clement C Moore.

Um, but there was quite a lot of debate about that.

Um, you can see, um, actually quite clearly too, I think with this poem how easily this kind of metre threatens,

um, to turn into light verse, um, verse wouldn't be suitable for serious topic.

And unsurprisingly, this unspecific metre is very often used by by children's writers who nowadays are almost the only,

certainly the only bestselling writers who write in verse. But almost given that most poets write in free verse, which isn't verse at all.

Um, so Julie Donaldson on went the mouse through the deep dark wood and owls, or the mouse and the mouse look good.

Where are you going? To a little brown mouse coming up to you. My treetop house.

It's frightfully nice of you, owl, but no, I'm going to have tea with a Gruffalo.

And again, as with those nonsense words in Hiawatha, the Gruffalo, the very sound,

the shape of that word is chosen to anchor, um, the metre in which it's going to sit.

Um. Sometimes. So, um, in the late 19th century, as the old metropole norms and possibilities begin to vanish, fragments of these,

these triple metres, these kind of little metres start to appear in apparently I am poems and we get little substitutions.

Um, Derek, actually just just just a point of note, I think has popularised the term dolnick to describe these kinds of problems or problems that are.

Basically iambic. Um, but but that's what counting.

Accents is more important than counting syllables. Um, he argues that a lot of Hopkins's, um, sprung rhythm is actually, um, dolnick.

It's a Russian word, um, nursery rhymes to things like Doctor Foster went to Gloucester in a shower of rain.

He stepped in a puddle right up his middle. Never went there again.

Um, okay. Um, I'm going to go on now to talk about about rhyme.

So I've used the word rhyme rhyming on rhymed a lot in these lectures.

And sometimes I've suggested there might be innate, um, or even necessary affinities between rhyme and some particular metrical types.

Um, Roy Mathy is actually much simpler, much more easily recognisable phenomenon than the question of stress patterns.

And I find that in these native speakers of English tend to not be able to spot it.

If there's if there's a rhyme I need to tell you as highly sophisticated readers how to work out what it's happening.

Um, so for the last part of this lecture, I'll just offer a few thoughts on, first of all,

how to classify different types of rhyme and secondly, the potential tonal effects that they might have.

Um, so there are lots of rhyming patterns in English.

Um, the couplets, you know, come at the end of Shakespeare's sonnets.

Um, the quatrains in Shakespeare's sonnets have alternate rhyming patterns a, b, a, b, a Petrarch, and sonnet has the enclosed rhyme arbour.

That's also, um, the pattern of in memoriam in a shorter line.

Um. I've read about types of humour before, this Italian interlocking pattern that one of the useful things about that is

that it it seems to the manuscript culture prevented from some being corrupted.

Um, it's a form that's hard. Hard to end.

Uh, Shelley Shelley likes it and yet experiments with it in little getting, um, but in a way that instead of using real rhyme,

he's just alternating between masculine sort of monosyllabic endings or strong endings and and feminine words.

Words like going, um, why the which have a cryptic pattern.

There are also many more complicated, ornate, um, sort of stanza forms, um, which I think the two most common on Spenser and Stanza.

I'm going to Rima.

Um, and you might think about what the relationship between between these is what what is happening in the Spenser in stanza to extend it over rhyme.

But, um, really, you come to those when you find them, you read criticism that tells you that particular poem is in this pattern.

Um, I don't think you're going to ever be required to, to recognise it.

And you sent an exam question. But again, if on paper, you know, there was a third quotation from Pope and it was in rhyming couplets,

we really, really want to be able to say something about that.

Um, so in linguistics, people are very precise about the way they talk about rhyme.

In fact, weirdly, they call it something similar rhyme.

Uh, I mean. Um, syllables, they say begin with an onset, and the end of the syllable is called the rhyme or imme,

and that itself is broken up into two parts, a nucleus and a coda.

Um, so um, in the word cat, for example, the onset would be the, uh, the letter cat.

Um, in, in the rhyming word that it would be the. Um.

And the rhyme is what remains the app sound.

And then inside that rhyme, inside the app sound, the nucleus is the vowel, uh, and the coda is the consonant.

And the word like, say catch again, the nucleus is the vowel, uh, and then the coda is more complex.

It's sort of thicker. It's that that longest syllable.

So rhyming words to return to the conventional meaning and spelling words have a different onset but the same rhyme.

At least that's true if they're perfect rhymes. Hence Cat, the cat sat on the mat, and so on.

Um, Tennyson's In Memoriam poem I've mentioned before because I thought some of you might be reading it.

Um, it's a virtual playbook of classic perfect rhymes in English.

C and V must and dust matching.

Catch, sing and sing, lead and shade and so on.

Some of them are actually repeated many times over and without.

I see many real felt staleness or lack of variety.

It's not something, um, that he's looking for. Um, the same thing is true of words with sonnets.

They have really boring rhymes. Um, you get the same words just coming up again and again.

Um, he's not trying to impress in the way that modern poets do.

And in fact, some of his contemporaries did say Byron in Don Jr, and with the novelty of his rhymes,

the oddity, the kind of cleverness or surprise of fitting two unlike things together.

Um, you also know that even in traditional metrical poems,

poets make use of many sound similarities that are less complete, less simple, and less perfect than cat, sat and mat.

Um, so alternatives are represented by repeating slightly less of the rhyming syllable.

Um, so these are the technical terms, I think in some ways, calling these things half right or imperfect wrong will usually suffice.

Um, the important thing is, is to notice that they occur a lot in metrical verse.

They don't occur at the line and very often at all.

But if you see something at the line and it appears to you to be not a perfect rhyme, it is very likely, you know,

as with love and move, that historical pronunciation has changed, and it once was a perfect rhyme with the wind in Don's song.

Um, so in paradigm um c v c the first and the last consonants match, but the vowel changes lot and lack sigma and summer ghost and guest Hopkins.

I mean, if you are able to to know these when you're writing about either metrical or did you use the technical terms, that's great.

Um, consonants. Only the last consonant matches.

So lock and back. Um. Do they want to?

It doesn't really make sense. They lock on back. Ryme ghost and based ghost and base seem to be a lot closer than lock and back.

Um, would I write a poem in which I rhymed, lock them back?

Probably not. Um, would I let myself one ghost and based?

I could sort of imagine doing that. And I think when modern poets write in rhyme,

they often feel that there's some necessity to mix up perfect rhymes with rhymes of this kind, um, to avoid producing.

And in fact, that in an era of free verse has become just to kind of crushingly monotonous, maybe too perfect, um, with assonance.

Um, the vowels are the ones that match. So drop and botch big and drip.

It's my view that in contemporary English, assonance is a much bigger deal than it used to be.

In fact, I to my edge, pop and botch basically do rhyme.

They rhyme in a much more strongly than luck. And back to you.

Um, also, you should note that people sometimes say what masculine and feminine rhymes with a feminine rhymes are things like leather and weather.

Um, so the trickiest words with a stress is not on the end syllable, but on the penultimate syllable.

Um, I think you see the masculine rhymes a much more common the obvious problem with that terminology,

but it hasn't particularly been replaced by something else. Um, so leather.

And whether or not that is a perfect rhyme, isn't it? The other, um, intellectual contextual is a nice one.

Let's, um, Byron, um, you can think about what kind of rhyme that is or centre rent is.

Um, it's a kind of imperfect, um, rhyme sort of assonance and a polysyllabic rhyme.

Um, so. In all of them. I think that the all of these partial rhymes.

Um, there is a sense of return grounded in difference.

Um, and you might notice, too, that spelling is often a much less useful clue about phonetic similarity than in most perfect rhymes.

Um, in modern English, Paul Muldoon, the Belfast parrot, is often described as the great master of partial rhyme.

Michael Longley quipped that he could even rhyme Cat with dog.

Oh, I can't do a Northern Irish accent, but if you imagine in your head Northern Irish accent, you can see why.

Um, that is more funny than it seems at first sight.

Some accents of English rhyme more than others. Um, so over time, perfect rhymes seem to become less desirable and less enjoyable.

What was once seen as tasteful or classical now seems sometimes hackneyed, cheap, boring, and sometimes sonically uninteresting.

So in, um, an excellent article, Pope's Reasonable Rhymes old article from 1974, um, he kind of describes how we,

as modern readers are simultaneously drawn into and slightly repelled, um, by rhyming pairs of the most classic and conventional kind.

So on the one hand, these rhymes seem to have an unnaturally reasonable quality,

as if they represent some kind of discovery of fundamental linguistic equivalence.

And that won't be because they're often cognate words, or even because they come from similar etymological roots.

Um, so he gives various examples. One here must indust um, various examples from Pope.

Wherever you walk cool gales, you'll fan the glade trees where you settle crowd into a shade.

But soon the sun with milder rays descends to the cool ocean where his journey.

Ends. Um, and I this this bowl where once an ivy twines and swirling clusters bend the curling vines and so on.

Same phenomenon in Shakespeare's couplets at the end of the sonnets, um,

or sometimes in the plays um, to close and seen emphatically like a curtain for the longest.

Men can breathe or eyes can see so long lives. This and this gives life my example from the first lecture to the.

On the other hand, as Kenneth says, the stable nature of these rhymes makes them troublingly predictable.

You don't want to always be able to guess what will come next about something that,

um, happens in in light verse often and in bad first of all, periods.

Um, so and this itself, um, kind of is not an entirely modern idea.

It seems to have begun as some suspicion of rhyme, but actually perfect rhyme.

Um, as early as Milton. Um, so in the eloquent preface to Paradise Lost, Milton had strongly defended his decision to write an epic poem.

Blank verse. Um, rather than in a rhyming form like rhyming couplets.

His poem, he says, is an example, set the first in English of ancient liberty recovered.

So the heroic poem from the troublesome and modern bondage of rhyming with a modern bondage is very similar,

actually, to arguments made in the early 20th century about the need for free verse.

It was very influential anyway. Normalised non rhyming first blank verse as the best form for long narrative poems,

just as it had already been normalised on the stage in the blank verse.

Parts of it is beaten in Jacobean plays. So when, 50 years after Milton Pope translated Homer's Iliad into rhyming couplets.

Some critics were quite unhappy.

They thought his chosen form was unworthy, but often they do use very gendered language that it's feminine, effete, trivial.

So Edward Young, in his Conjectures on Original Composition, says, um.

Um, had Milton ever wrote, Pope had been less to blame.

Um, but when in Milton's genius, Homer, as it were, personally rose to forbid Britain's doing him that ignoble wrong.

It is less pardonable by that effeminate decoration to put Achilles in petticoats a second time.

Um, how much nobler had it been if his numbers to numbers were for the lines of a unit where the syllables are counted as an exception?

Syllabic verse had rolled on in full flow through the various modulations of masculine melody, um,

into those grandiose of solemn sound, which are indispensable, demanded by the native dignity of heroic song.

It was Doctor Johnson, actually, who has the opposite position. It's quite a lively debate.

He says poetry may subsist without rhyme, but English poetry will not often please, uh.

Nor can rhyme ever be safely spared. But where the subject is able to support itself, he says.

Blank verse has neither the easiness of prose nor the melody of numbers, and therefore tears by long continuance.

Um. Modern critics tend to focus instead on what is achingly predictable information impoverished, trite, cliched about ryme,

and some of the arguments for early free verse focus on this to say not just on the metre, but on the need to get away from rhyme.

You can probably guess what the missing words are here. The sun, that brief December day rose cheerless over hills of.

Guesses. I'm sorry.

It's grey. And darkly circle gave at noon a satellite van waning.

Yeah, so great is it. Not least because we wouldn't say that in waiting.

We rather than the other than a waning moon. Um, when you can remember one's teaching for a professor at Harvard into early 19th century poetry.

I was a lowly graduate student. And she read aloud some of these poems.

And really, you know, once you settled into them, you could guess every second, every occurrence or a rhyming word.

Um, in Julia Donaldson again, what could possibly come next?

It's frightfully nice of you, Albert.

No, I'm going to have tea with a I mean, even even someone who hasn't learned to read yet themselves and who's what's going there?

It's roughly so in free verse poetry.

Um, what is the role of perfect rhyme?

Well, that's rather beyond the these lectures, but, um, I think internal half rhymes and para rhymes are more common than full rhyme.

But having said all of that, use skilfully common and predictable rhymes.

The classic playbook of rhymes, the In memoriam or pope rhymes can still produce very powerful, pleasurable effects.

Um, as in as in Larkin's brilliant tiny poem about entropy, about the way that chaos and decay, in fact all structured systems.

So. And with this, um, watching the shard core striking the basket,

skidding across the floor shows less and less of luck and more and more failure spreading back up the,

um, earlier and earlier, the on raised hand calm.

The apple unbidden, in the palm. Um, so if perfect Romans tread a fine line between being impressively complete and somehow overly complete,

predictably complete, complex and polysyllabic rhymes also can produce surprisingly different and very tonal effects.

On the one hand, they can be subtle. They can be witty, uh, novel, playful, but they can also turn very quickly into being over subtle,

over witty, slightly trite, and giving a sense that the poets quite pleased with themselves.

Um, so my first book of poems. I was quite pleased when it occurred to me to rhyme Starro Promis'd, um,

the common brand of Czech pilsner with another food item from a different part of the globe tonkotsu.

Miso ramen. I was genuinely quite proud of that at the time, but looking back,

I would have to admit that it is in itself a rather trivial and meaningless discovery.

There's no there's no essential similarity between between those two things.

It doesn't have, um, the meaning of, of say, um, um and palm, um, where two related parts of the body,

um, have, have in English grown words that sound similar to each other.

Um, so I said, I will end here, but I actually want to read one more thing.

So this is one of my favourite rhyming triplets, unlike my story, Bronwen and Roman rhyme.

I think this is an example of playful, polysyllabic rhyme being used.

A very good excess, uh, to a very good effect. This is.

This is Auden. Um, maybe I'll say a little bit more about at the beginning of next lecture, because we're out of time.

Um, so the triplet is already, of course, overdetermined as a form of prefix, as a triplet, as we get three rhymes in a row.

And here there's also a French phrase which the rhyme encourages you slightly to mispronounce.

Um, I think that's quite delightful, but others might find it quite odious.

Art in intention is mimesis, but realised the resemblance ceases.

So that's the normal form of the poem couplets.

And then Auden writes, Art is not life, and cannot be a midwife to society, for art is a fait accompli.

So the bee complicating itself in society and then the the longer French phrase um, this newsletter.

Um, okay. Um, let's stop there. Next week is the last lecture.

Um, if anyone has any questions that they would like answering, um, I would be really happy to do that.

Um, otherwise I'm going to talk about blank verse, and then I'm going to talk about free verse.

And in the course of doing that about, um, a more general phenomenon, which is this.

So the interplay of ensemble and caesura, so lines that run over and lines that stop halfway through.

So in other words, syntactic structures that are too short for the lines are embedded in.

Then you get lots of the zero or syntactic structures that are too long. So they're always forced on to the next line.

Um, okay. Thanks everybody. Yeah.

