[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
Uh, the OED entry spills into more than a thousand words of definitions and examples.

Pointing out that story can mean anything from a true account of what really happens.

History as opposed to fiction, as the dictionary puts it.

Uh, to a myth or a joke or an entertaining lie.

Then there are the popular phrases. That's, uh, it gets bundled into, uh, which in the 19th century included story time.

First used in 1822 and same story in 1847.

Uh, coinages that might remind us that the English language is especially good at creating little subplots of its own,

as old words go off on new adventures. And, of course.

And story was also a word that many Victorian writers were cautiously, self-consciously drawn to.

In his preface to The Ambassadors, Henry James pointed out that his own bag of adventures,

as he put it as a writer, was only half emptied by the published novel.

There is the story of one's hero, he explains.

But also the story of one's story, i.e. the secret history of how it was dreamt up and put together.

And, of course, uh, similar stories underlie most published works, like this Far Side cartoon about the writing of Moby Dick.

Uh, these are the private scenes of a writer's life that involve hours of staring into space,

tossing bits of paper into the bin, trying to shuffle words into a sequence that will make them sing.

But another like the ambassadors or maybe take also forms part of several public histories.

There's the history of genre, the history of experiments in narrative voice, and so on.

And one way of thinking about any Victorian novel might be to say it is an encounter between the private pressures of the writer's style.

And the public pressures of established genres and forms.

This is what allows the best Victorian fiction to resist telling the same old stories in the same old ways.

This is what allows the novel in particular, to celebrate its potential for literary innovation and and to remain fresh and new or, in a word, novel.

Or put in other way, put much more simply.

One question you might want to keep in the back of your mind this term, as you get to grips with individual writers, is this.

When you look at the development of Victorian fiction as a whole?

What's the story? Is there a plot?

Who are the heroes? The heroines. Looking back with the privilege of hindsight, of course, it's tempting to read this story as a romance,

one that begins in humble circumstances with Walter Scott's unprecedented success at the start of the 19th century,

and then moves through Dickens and George Eliot and a pile of flashy potboilers,

and finally arrives at the sophisticated fiction of writers like James and Conrad.

And viewed in that way on Victorian fiction becomes little more than a bridge between romanticism and modernism.

A kind of awkward stage that needed to be got through in order to produce masterpieces like Ulysses or The waves.

But at the time things were far less certain.

Victorian writers who set out to explore the novel as a form saw themselves as pioneers, not settlers.

Everything was provisional.

Novels were thought experiments where absolute truths became relative ones, where events could be viewed from so many different perspectives.

They encouraged readers to wonder what they had in common.

How many private worlds might be hidden inside this shared world of ours?

The Victorian has been peculiarly the age of the triumph of fiction.

Edwin Gosse argues in 1892.

But there was also a lot of discussion over the gap between theory and practice, or how fiction should work, versus how it really did work.

The literary world hums with questions without clear answers.

Questions like what was the right balance between realism and romance?

Or should a novel depict the world as it was or as it might be?

Or did it work like Middlemarch? Encourage sympathy by showing us what the world looked like through the eyes of a character like Dorothea?

Or did it encourage selfishness by encouraging us to curl up with a book and ignore the demands of real people?

And should the novelist see their work as a window onto life?

Or as a piece of all the played according to its own rules.

No.

These were, of course, unsettled and ongoing debates in the period, which is why it's always a mistake to think about what the Victorians believed.

The Victorians like us, they believed many things,

some of which contradicted or revised or or simply misunderstood what other people at the time believed.

Now let's take just one small example. I mean, 1838, Edward Lytton published an essay with a title on art in fiction.

Uh, in 1884, it was the Turn of Henry James with his essay the Art of fiction.

So moving from in to ULV with a slight shift of grammar but a body swerve of emphasis

after 50 years of experiment no longer was fictionally thought to include elements of art.

Now it was thought to be at art.

The art of fiction. What's maybe especially interesting about many Victorian novels is that they didn't just provoke these debates.

They included them. Take this.

This is the first letter written by Young Pip in Great Expectations.

My dear Jo, I hope you are quite well.

I shall soon be able to teach you, Joe, and then we shall be so glad.

And when I am apprenticed to you, Joe. What larks. And believe me.

In fiction. Pip. So there are many reminders here.

That pet story is being generated by two voices at once.

There's the wide eyed young people who experienced these events.

And innocently misspells soon be able as son be able.

And behind him or alongside him. There's also the sadder, wiser voice of old pep.

Who knows that as the adopted son of Abel Mac, which.

In some respects he is indeed the son of Hable.

But the biggest clash of perspectives is left to last because does infection mean infection?

Or given that after accepting Mag, which is dirty money, pick thinks that everything connecting to other people is filthy.

He's contaminated. Does it mean infection?

Both of these were popular metaphors at the time for the power that stories had to link people together.

Affection and infection. According to George Eliot.

Art was a mode of amplifying experience and extending our contact with our fellow beyond the bounds of our personal lot.

On the other hand, several critics claimed that readers might also be linked to their fellow men in much less pleasant ways.

So in 1859, an article on books and their uses gloomily wondered if in here I'm quoting, the craving for books may not be a disease.

A few years earlier, in 1853, another writer argued that romances which excited the emotions of their readers, especially female readers, were.

The writer said the secret cause of much ill health, insanity, and even death.

So. Affection. Infection.

Or does infection really mean in fiction?

After all, Pep's main problem in greater expectations is that he thinks he's in one kind of story.

A fairy tale where he's going to rescue the princess from the enchanted castle and live happily ever after.

But discovers too late. He's in a very different kind of story.

A mystery plot about money and class and revenge.

That might be why, whenever he uses the word fiction, it reveals what is fake and phoney, like the fiction.

He says that there is and not a moment to be lost.

When you go to London or the fiction, when he gets there and he and Herbert are, uh, he says, constantly enjoying ourselves.

And of course, Pip isn't alone in creating and treating fiction with an element of suspicion.

Again and again. In this period, you see writers nagging away at the question of what stories are for.

And what they might do. It's like a kind of cultural itch that they couldn't stop scratching.

And that might be why some of the most interesting criticism of Victorian fiction is to be found in the stories themselves.

And this takes several different forms.

The most obvious are scenes of writing in the consular realm or artists novel, a genre depicting the lives of fictional novelists.

And examples here would be Thackeray's Pendennis, Dickens's David Copperfield, Gissing, and New Grub Street,

as well as lesser known examples like Thomas Millers and Godfrey Moulder, uh in, published in 1842.

Which follows the the fortunes of a provincial writer through an apprenticeship of producing hack work for the London periodicals.

And finally he finds success as a novelist.

And in the illustration here,

what you can see is the hero meeting a publisher surrounded by books that resemble what most of them will eventually become.

In other words, bundles of wastepaper. But even more common than scenes of writing with scenes of reading.

These appear in many, many Victorian stories, as if the writers wanted to entertain themselves with fantasies about how they hopes to be dead,

or maybe torment themselves with fears about how they might be misread.

Now, of course, there are limits to this.

So Dickens's characters are just about the only Victorians who never appear to have read anything by Dickens.

Uh, just as the people in TV soaps like EastEnders or Coronation Street live in a weird parallel universe in which nobody ever watches,

um, EastEnders or Coronation Street.

Uh, but otherwise, I think it's hard to miss the sheer number of scenes in which characters are offered as models of how to read.

Or warnings about how easy it is to mis read.

Now, this isn't only a matter of affection. Um, the spectacle of someone reading was also a popular subject of Victorian paintings.

Like the one I'm showing you here, Alice in Wonderland, which, of course, could be the title of the story the girl is listening to.

Or it could be a clue about where she goes when she disappears into her own imagination.

Alice in Wonderland. And sometimes I'm fiction and painting overlapped.

So all guess this. Eggs the travelling companions. Shows one woman reading while her watch her sister, her twin, her doppelganger.

Since opposites are quietly dreaming, both seem happy to ignore the landscape that's framed by the train window.

Both seem to prefer the kind of world they can create for themselves.

And there's a lot of different historical context you could put around this painting as a different kind of frame.

Uh, things like the railway station bookstores launched in the 1840s by a young entrepreneur named W.H. Smith.

And the emergence of paperback novels as another kind of travelling companion.

This is the first period that sees the paperback.

A more simply, you could compare it to this, which is one of the original illustrations to Through the Looking Glass, published seven years later.

Has the same style of composition. Even the same style of hat.

So. Is it a coincidence? Or is it an artistic joke?

A reminder that Alice two is asleep.

Looking Glass Land is a disconnected jumble of everything she might have experienced or seen when she was awake.

No. If. Victorian fiction. Includes scenes of reading.

It also contains more subtle clues about how we might approach it.

And sometimes these are built into its own style. Uh, so just take this one sentence from Charles Kingsley's novel Altered Lock.

Uh, this is, uh, describing the state of the nation in 1850.

See, Kingsley says, see what a chaos of noble materials is here.

All confused. It is true. Polarised, jarring and chaotic here.

Bigotry. Bad. Self-will. Superstition.

She appears and often,

but only waiting for the one inspiring spirit to organise and unite and consecrate this chaos into the noblest polity the world ever saw realised.

Well, read this closely. You might think that Kingsley is trying to answer his own appeal.

You might notice how his dashes threaten the sentence with fracture, but then magically transform themselves into little bridges.

As he continues to search for meaningful connections.

And then finally he completes his sentence with that word realised.

So he shows how easily writing can break down when it tries to make sense of the confusing and modern world.

But then he realises a solution in his syntax, but recognises it and also makes it real.

So what am I arguing here? Where are we? Where have we got to?

Well, just to recap, so far I've been trying to suggest, uh, two main ways of thinking about Victorian fiction.

Uh, the first is that its development is far more complicated than the sort of teleological narrative you find in many critical surveys.

A neat plot that moves us from Dickens to Conrads, like a bus moving from stop to stop.

Um, the second thing is that if we want to avoid clumsy, one size fits all labels like the Gothic novel or the Condition of England novel,

we might instead want to look at Victorian fiction through a series of smaller textual keyholes.

Little moments like Dickens is ambiguous in action.

Or Kingsley's sprawling syntax. Little moments that start with a single narrative detail but then open up into much wider critical questions.

And we might also want to remind ourselves that Victorian fiction and criticism often overlapped.

It's easy to forget the literary critics. Are the only critics who use the same medium as their subjects.

Ballet critics do not dance their reviews.

Art critics do not paint or sculpt theirs.

Only the literary critic relies on words on the page to explain the workings of other words on other pages.

And what makes that overlap slightly more obvious in the Victorian period is that often fiction writer and critic were the same person.

Why does that matter? Well, it reminds us that when we refer to Victorian fiction.

We're not only talking about a particular kind of writing, like novels and short stories and fairytales and so on.

We're also talking about a cultural discourse.

A whole network of arguments and assumptions,

stretching from the writer study to the reader's armchair via interventions from

publishers and reviewers and everyone else involved in the literary world.

And looked at in this way, Victorian fiction starts to mean more than just the books you might find on a modern reading list.

It also includes the cultural narratives underpinning books like Great Expectations or Altered Locke.

It means the kinds of stories that Victorian readers were telling themselves about themselves and about the world that they inhabited.

Now, I appreciate this might sound a little abstract.

So, um, let me give you a quick example just to show what I mean.

Um. One of the ways you might draw these links between Victorian writers and critics and readers.

Is to investigate those moments where they seem to be drawing on the same language.

Up. Take one popular metaphor of the story as a kind of house.

You see it all over the place.

Um, in his most famous preface, uh, Henry James describes the House of fiction as one with a million windows looking out onto the world.

Each of which, he says, is created by the needs of the individual vision and by the pressure of the individual will.

What he means by this is that even if two people wrote stories about exactly the same subject, they would never have exactly the same outlook.

The stories themselves, then, would never be exactly the same.

Um, so let's take a modern, uh, parallel. Um, if one person wrote a film script about the last, uh, American presidential campaign.

Uh, they might make it a, uh, tense courtroom drama.

Uh, that was inspired by the cinematography of Stanley Kubrick.

Another might produce a parody of Cinderella, in which one of the main characters was transformed into a pumpkin.

Uh, but each story would frame the subject in a different way.

Each page, each window, would observe it from a slightly different angle.

And we can also see Henry James exploring the metaphor of the house in his own fiction.

So The Turn of the screw, for example, takes place in what he describes as a big, ugly,

antique but convenient house embodying a few features of a building still older, half replaced and half utilised.

For anyone who's read earlier ghost stories about creaky old houses where things go bump in the night.

This works like a literary wink. It reminds us that although we are creating a modern reading, a modern narrative.

Uh, about the ghosts that we see or maybe invent for ourselves.

It has its foundations in much earlier Gothic fiction.

The turn of the screw, then is being presented as a modern extension to a house originally built more than a century earlier.

So that's one metaphor. And an even more popular metaphor in the period is of a story not as a house, but as a kind of home.

From the poem The Homes of England by Phylicia Heymans, from which we get the phrase stately homes.

Uh, two popular songs like Home Sweet Home.

So many Victorian writers, the home was much more than just a physical place.

It was a mystical repository of values like security, privacy, love.

Home was where the heart was.

And the home was also closely identified with scenes of reading.

Hence, all those Victorian domestic scenes that depicted the family gathered around the hearth

to listen to a story or the title of periodicals like Dickens's Household Words.

So if the home, then is where most books ended up when they left the publishers.

It's also where many plots finished.

Uh. Dickens often concludes his stories with little domestic tableaux, where the characters settle down after their adventures.

Mr. Pickwick is tucked away in Dingley Dell. Oliver Twist is safely back at home with Mr. Brownlow.

But of course. If a happy home is where these stories are heading.

It's also where the narrative must cease.

A novel about a happy home would be no more interesting than one about commuting or taking the dog for a walk.

Unless the routines were disrupted in some way.

And that's why Dickens allows his characters the rewards of a happy ending in a happy home,

only after the novel has put everything it represents at risk.

That's why you get the introduction of home wreckers like Silas Wegg in the novel,

our mutual friend who spends every evening outside the house of the boffins gloating over his power,

Dickens says to strip the roof off the inhabiting family like the roof of a pack of cards.

An awful lot of Victorian fiction follows a similar pattern.

Whether it's Little Nell wandering through the pages of The Old Curiosity Shop or its Lockwood's in Wuthering Heights,

grabbing a ghostly hands on, rubbing it on a broken window pane until his sheets are wet with blood again and again.

Victorian writers discourage us, the readers, from feeling too much at home.

And here you might want to compare what Adrian Rich says about poetry.

She says. It's not a resting on the given, but a questing toward what might otherwise be.

It will always pick a quarrel with the found peace.

Uh, place the refuge, the sanctuary.

And I think the best Victorian fiction also works in a similar way.

He might draw us on with the promise of a neat resolution, a happy ending.

But but in the meantime it disturbs and it disorientated us.

It adopts familiar plots and narrative devices and then it makes them strange.

It is, as Freud might say, uncanny.

And we see that same thing happening in much smaller ways.

Two.

Take Dickens's preface to his novel bleak House, where he claimed that in the novel, he deliberately dwelt on the romantic side of familiar things.

And by this he didn't mean that he wanted to make life seem more romantic in the sense of, you know, exciting and sexy.

Um, he meant he wanted to describe everyday life and ordinary objects in a way that would refresh our perceptions,

that would make us look again and think again about bits of the world we usually take for granted.

In the opening chapter, for instance, um, we told about the soft black drizzle of London's sooty air.

There's the crust upon crust of mud on the pavements.

There's the Lord Chancellor being addressed as Mallard, as if language two was being crushed into dirty, meaningless fragments.

Millard has a linguistic equivalent of mud.

And those sorts of descriptions give us a feeling of surprise mixed up with a feeling of inevitability.

I think a combination of what?

And. Oh yes, of course.

As we all asked to look at something from an unexpected angle and then realise that if it seems strange,

that's because we just hadn't really noticed it until now.

It's the kind of writing that reveals how much in the world remains invisible to us until someone like Dickens points it out.

And not only Dickens, of course.

Um, if you'd like to read something that's a bit less well known and also play similar narrative games with equal seriousness.

Um, have a look at the bond woman's narrative.

It's probably written in the late 1850s, but the manuscript was only discovered around 20 years ago.

It was written by a fugitive American slave, uh, named Hannah Crofts.

And it's probably the earliest surviving novel by an African-American woman.

Um, it's also an extraordinary act of literary ventriloquism.

Because she keeps returning to and reworking dozens of passages from bleak House,

often so closely that her novel reads more like a translation written in the same language.

She works within an established narrative tradition to discover a new voice for herself.

In bleak House, there's a character called Caddy Ellerby who says, I won't be a slave all my life.

An existence of a novel like the bond woman's narrative is, I suppose, in one sense, and a crafty way of saying.

Not only in my personal life, but in terms of my writing.

Nor will I. I won't be a slave all my life.

And what does that suggest about Victorian fiction more generally? Well, maybe that despite the rise of fictional realism in the period,

the best Victorian writers didn't simply reflect the world they found themselves living in.

Instead, they use language in a way that allowed them to remake this world.

Now, actually, as a critical word, language is probably to, um, to singular for the range of styles you find in a lot of Victorian fiction.

And that's also true of the range you find in individual novels.

In fact, when reading something like Daniel Deronda or Lord Jim, it might be more useful to remember that the word text has the same root as textile.

And to think of a novel as a fabric, a design woven from many different styles of speech, many different linguistic threads.

Theatrical dialogue, uh, newspaper reportage, Street slang.

Professional vocabularies. And many, many more.

It means that Victorian novels are typically hybrid forms.

They are literary patchworks.

And if you wanted to give that idea a theoretical gloss, you could read back tens celebrated essay discourse in the novel,

and you'll find the publication details for that on your handout.

An essay in which he says that the novel encourages the mingling of many different voices, or, to use his words, hetero glossier.

And that is what makes the novel such a radically democratic form, according to Bakhtin,

because it allows writers to put on different masks and try out different ways of looking at the world.

Without having to commit themselves to any one of them.

And of course, that's also what we're encouraged to do as readers.

And one of the great developments of Victorian fiction is the increasingly sophisticated interplay between psychology and narrative voice.

History books tell us what people did.

Novels, though, tell us what they think they are doing,

and the use of different techniques like free indirect discourse in the period allowed readers to dip in and out of different characters minds,

to just slip on another person's skin and try it out for size.

It allowed a reader to imagine what it was like to be someone else, while keeping a critical distance from them.

It balanced sympathy against scrutiny.

And there is some recent, uh, narrative theory that suggests that, in fact, this is one of the main social and ethical benefits of fiction.

Um, according to critics like Martha Nussbaum.

And again, you'll find details on my hand up, uh,

what the best fiction gives us is an opportunity to rehearse our sympathy for other people while also testing out its limits.

Reading a novel like Daisy Miller tells us about much more than just Daisy Miller, or even about Henry James.

It's a crash course in learning more about ourselves and fine tuning our responses to other people.

And Henry James isn't the only Victorian writer committed to this idea that fiction might be a way of testing and extending a writer's sympathies.

In bleak House, the narrator asks. What connection can there be between the place in Lincolnshire, the house in town, the mercury in powder?

That's a servant. And the whereabouts of Joe the outlaw with the broom.

That's a crossing sweeper. You had that distant ray of light upon him when he swept the churchyard step.

What connection can that have been between many people in the innumerable histories of this world,

who, from opposite sides of great gulfs, have nevertheless been very curiously brought together?

Well, the answers given by Dickens's plot to this question all things like love.

And money and disease.

But another answer might be the return.

It's the reader who has to work out how each parts of bleak House connect to each other.

Part. It's the reader whose sympathies allow characters as different,

as a daintily dressed footman and a ragged crossing sweeper to find some common ground.

But of course, what complicates that is that.

What connection can there be is also the question that Dickens had to ask himself as he was writing the novel.

As many of you will know already, and like much of Dickens's fiction, like much of Victorian fiction, it was originally published in monthly parts.

Um, you won't be able to see these very well at the back, but, um, I'm holding up these, um, some, uh, examples, uh, modern facsimiles of the, um, uh,

what Victorian readers would have bought, um, every, uh, four weeks or so, uh, down to, uh,

adverts for things like, uh, an invisible spine supporter, uh, or doctor low cocks, female wafers.

I'd like to think the low cock is a part, I suspect a little, um, uh, but that kind of publication meant that Dickens was only ever.

A month or so ahead of his readers.

Looking a bit like those college cartoons where the hero frantically throws down railway tracks, prevents himself from being derailed.

Even if they can sketched out his plots in advance.

He had to make up his narratives as he went along.

His novels, then, were a triumphant reconciliation of design and contingency.

What does that matter? What does it mean for readers? Well, for one thing,

it meant that reading a novel like bleak House in 1 or 2 long bursts simply

wasn't an option until the parts would gather together and published as a whole.

And instead, the reading experience was one that involved long periods of anticipation,

followed by brisk narrative updates and encouraged stories that were crammed with some details that could safely be forgotten,

and others that had to be stored up and returned to in the months ahead.

Unlike other Victorian innovations like the Crystal Palace, constructed from prefabricated slabs of cast iron and plate glass or,

or maybe, um, Pre-Raphaelite paintings like, um, uh, like this one created, uh, tiny detail by tiny detail.

Um. The novels ask the reader to work out how the parts combined into a whole.

Uh. If you'd like to read more about that.

That Victorian obsession with, um, patching fragments together, I can recommend a book by Peter Conrads called The Victorian A treasure House.

Uh, the Victorian Treasure House by Peter Connor. Uh, it takes, uh, the title from Henry James's review of Middlemarch,

where James says that Eliot's novel is a treasure house of details, but an indifferent whole.

It's actually a question you might ask about a lot of Victorian writing. Is it a treasure house of details, but an indifferent how?

So what about other innovations in the period? Well, um.

The rise of magazines. Also led to an appetite for short fiction.

Just as the high price of three volume novels led to a lot of cheap reprints of classic authors,

and also whole bookshelves of imitations and, uh, plagiarism.

Uh, like this one here, um, is Oliver Twist, uh, by Bolds and Oliver Twist by Boss.

And in many works there was an increasingly close relationship between text and illustration.

So here are two illustrations images from Alice's Adventures in Wonderland, uh, which, uh,

Carol arranged to be printed on successive pages so that by turning the page, uh, the reader could make the Cheshire Cat disappear.

Uh, like a magic trick. Uh, or, I suppose a primitive form of film dissolves.

And of course we shouldn't remember.

Surely we shouldn't forget that many other kinds of story that people were reading as well as or instead of novels.

Um, after all, most people were not reading authors like George Eliot and Anthony Trollope.

They were reading the Victorian equivalents of J.K. Rowling and Richard Osman.

Uh, many years ago. In his book The English Common Reader, the critic Richard Altech listed some rough sales figures for this period,

and I think the stats are still eye opening. So, um, Dickens's A Christmas Carol sold 15,000 copies in one year.

In the same period, Uncle Tom's Cabin sold 1.5 million copies.

Uh, Penny. Dreadful words like the string of pearls seen here, which first introduced the story of Sweeney Todd,

could sell hundreds of thousands of cheap copies in just a few weeks.

And in this context, writers were obviously aware what they needed to do to succeed in such a fiercely competitive literary marketplace.

In his autobiography, trollop describes how he got up at 5:30 a.m. every day,

right for exactly three hours before going off to his job in the General Post Office.

Uh, keeping one eye on his watch. He made himself right.

250 words every 15 minutes. Uh, which he proudly noted, allowed me to produce over ten pages of an ordinary novel volume a day,

and if kept up through ten months, would have given, as its result, three novels of three volumes each in the year.

So not much room for romantic inspiration there.

Trollip makes the process of writing fiction sound more like weighing sugar or learning the multiplication table.

No, clearly he was an extreme case. But he wasn't unusual.

In seeing, uh, his writing as a job rather than as a vocation.

Few writers other than Tennyson could make a comfortable living out of poetry.

But fiction fiction was a different matter.

Fiction was a literary democracy where fortunes could be made.

Where the most popular writers could become celebrities.

A word first used in its modern sense in the mid-19th century.

It was also a career that was open to women as much as two men.

Marie Carroll's novels were huge bestsellers. By the end of the century, Mrs. Henry Wood's novel East Lynne had sold more than half a million copies.

Now, obviously there there's a bit of ambivalence, um, here around the idea of popular success.

Um, when writers like Dickens were described at the time as popular authors.

There remains an element of condescension.

Uh, a faint sneer curling around that word.

Popular. But at the same time, it's probably no coincidence.

The Victorian period was also one of the great ages of parody.

As in Thackeray's collection Novels by Eminent Hands.

Which spoofs some of the most successful novelists of the day, jokingly but also enviously.

With so many writers fighting for attention. Parody was a good way of identifying and then fighting off the competition.

So. Where does that leave us?

What does all this mean for us?

Well, in some ways, um, the problem that we have as critics of Victorian fiction is parallel by one that was faced by writers of the time.

Where do you start? Uh, when you stop.

Um, how can you say anything about this big and messy world of stories without just drifting into commonplaces and cliches?

As Henry James put it in the preface to his novel Roderick Hudson. Um, really?

He says, universally, relations stop nowhere, and the exquisite problem of the artist is eternally but to draw by geometry of his own,

the circle within which they shall happily appear to do so.

What he meant by that is that life will always spill over the artificial borders that fiction imposes on it.

But when we read a good story, we want it to be experienced as something complete in itself.

And much the same thing might be said of a good essay about Victorian fiction.

This is another environment where relations stop nowhere.

You'll be discovering this yourselves this week. I'm sure that you know Volney, the vampire, these two Dracula that connects to travel writing.

Which brings us to a heart of darkness, which reminds us of Victorian textbooks, of a circulation of blood and so on and so on and so on.

So how can you write about anything without trying to write about everything?

Well, the rest of the lectures in this series should offer one set of answers, I hope.

And what I'm going to finish with today, just in the last couple of minutes,

is a reminder of some of the other strategies that I've been suggesting you could adopt.

Um, I should suggest I should stress that these are guidelines. These are not rules.

Uh, other critics will go about things in, um, in other ways.

In fact, the longer you study English, certainly in a place like Oxford,

the more you realise, um, how little consensus there is over how it should be done.

But anyway, for what it's worth. And in this lecture, I've been offering a fairly loose bundle of critical approaches.

But if you wanted a handle for that bundle, it would be the idea of relationships.

At its heart, a good deal of Victorian fiction sets out to understand human relationships,

friendship and marriage, and the past and the present and so on.

Um, and one of the best ways of tackling it might be through another set of critical relationships.

Um. So there's the relationship of text and context, which I'll be giving a different lecture on later this term.

Does the novel need reflect its context, or does it press back against it to encourage different kinds of reflection?

Uh, there's a relationship of past, a whole. How are isolated moments of the narrative assembled into patterns?

How should we read those patterns?

As a recognition that we enjoy stories because they give us the kind of order and completion that real life does not.

Or for another reason. And a related relationship might be the one between the writer's ideas and their style.

What distinguishes this writer's voice from the course of other voices that surrounded it at the time?

How does their writing teach us how to read it, to adapt ourselves to its demands?

And finally, what's the relationship between this story and earlier stories?

Does it settle itself comfortably into a set of conventions?

Does it renovate those conventions? Or does it strike off in a different direction entirely?

And if after answering all these questions and more, if after that, you still can't draw a neat circle around Victorian stories.

Maybe we should enjoy instead enjoy their promiscuous, polymorphous resistance to criticism.

After all, and one of the reasons we still enjoy reading Victorian fiction, I think, is that without it, there would be far less modern fiction.

Without David Copperfield, there would be no demon Copperhead.

Without Jane Eyre, there would be no Wide Sargasso Sea.

Again and again, contemporary writers like Sarah Walters or Peter Ackroyd or A.S. bind have proven that,

as the German philosopher Heidegger once pointed out, what distinguishes literary classics is that he says they are never used up.

What's a classic? A text that is never used up.

It's forever being extended in new directions again and again.

V ends on the last page of a Victorian novel.

Turns out to mean something more like to be continued.

Uh, thank you so much for your, um, attention. Um.

Uh, if you are interested in Victorian poetry, I'll be giving the introductory sort of survey overview, uh, of that, uh, here in a couple of hours.

It's, uh, uh, 12:00.

