[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
Good morning again. It was the best of times.

It was the worst of times. It was the age of wisdom.

It was the age of foolishness. It was the epoch of belief.

It was the epoch of incredulity. It was the season of lights.

It was the season of darkness. It was the spring of hope.

It was the winter of despair. We had everything before us.

We had nothing before us. We were all going direct to heaven.

We were all going direct the other way. And whatever.

The opening of A Tale of Two Cities tells us about revolutionary France,

it tells us far more about the Victorian love of paradox and opposition, North and south.

Jekyll and Hyde, double consciousness, Dorian Grey and the picture of Dorian Grey.

This was a time of twinning, splitting, mirroring of many different kinds.

And in this lecture I'm going to be suggesting that self confrontation.

Can also be seen at every level of Victorian poetry,

from poems that answered each other to rhymes that squared up on the page like Tweedledum and Tweedledee.

Victorian poems are dialogic. They generate discussion, debates, dissents,

and they emerged at a time when some of the biggest questions that poetry had to answer were over its own place in society.

Was poetry central or peripheral in importance.

Did the lines of a poem act like the periods, railway lines and telegraph cables to connect people together.

Or were they rather a way of preserving distinctions between high culture and popular culture, between tradition and modernity?

Now I'm starting here with questions rather than definitions,

because that's also a good way of thinking about many Victorian poems that they to ask questions.

Questions about all the things that critics write books and articles about, like love and sexual politics and identity and so on.

But but also about itself and its own place in the world.

What is a poem? What is it for?

What, if anything, does it do?

Now, of course, there are as many answers to these questions as there are poems.

So one way of tackling a Victorian anthology might be to treat it as the literary equivalent of the Great Exhibition Catalogue,

a fact book that included everything from a dressing table that doubled up as a fire escape to a bed with an alarm clock mechanism.

You can see here that could be set so the bed would eject the sleeper, a neatly folded self up.

Victorian poetry is equally full of surprises, like the sea in Tennyson's poem Ulysses.

It moans round with many voices.

Here's a list I borrowed from the critic Valentine Cunningham of just some of the things that Victorian poets write about and worry about.

Uh, Cod liver oil, railway lines and railway trains.

Chairs. Soup. Soap paintings.

Omnibuses. Going to the dentist. Grimm's law. Whether in the suburbs.

Dead dogs, cricket players a cabbage leaf.

Missing links. Tobacco booths. Snow. Sadomasochism.

Psychical research. Leaks. Onions, genitalia.

War. New woman. Fairies. Love. Death God.

Pain. Poverty. Poems. Faith.

Doubt. Science. Poets. Poetry.

Do I contradict myself? Asks Walt Whitman in Leaves of Grass.

Very well then I contradict myself, I am large.

I contain multitudes.

The same could be said of many Victorian poems.

Writing in the preface to his 1853 collection, Matthew Arnold warned that the days of a poet speaking out confidently to a group of readers had gone.

What was left was, he said, the dialogue of the mind with itself.

Public rhetoric had given way to private brooding.

What I'm going to suggest in the rest of this lecture is that, in fact,

this sort of self division can be seen as one of the Victorian poetry's defining strengths.

And maybe not just self division, maybe self multiplication.

Um, again and again, Victorian poets wonder aloud who they are speaking to.

Who is listening. And if their poems are sometimes drawn to the dialogue of the mind with itself, like the lonely speaker of Tennyson's Maud.

They're also drawn to what the critic Isobel Armstrong has called the dialogue of the poem with itself.

It's a really useful phrase. Isobel Armstrong, the dialogue of the poem with itself, that is,

these are poems which often question themselves, qualify themselves, or put another way.

Many Victorian poets found themselves in a situation described in T.S. Eliot's play The Family Reunion,

to be living on several planes at once, a character says, though one cannot speak with several voices at once.

The response of many Victorian poets was to write in a way that found a voice for their uncertainty.

It was to speak with several voices at once.

No. Put very crudely, when we discuss Victorian poetry, it might be useful to think of both of these terms,

both Victorian and poetry, as unstable compounds rather than single straightforward entities.

But of course, that's not the picture that we're used to.

Most of what we think we know about. The period was invented at the start of the 20th century by writers who were often too

busy ridiculing their literary parents to listen to what they had to say for themselves.

Um, take the opening of The Lovesong of J.

Alfred Prufrock, which echoes the ending of Tennyson's The Miller's Daughter.

Let us go. But then moves off in a very different direction.

As often happens when modernist poets get their hands on Victorian poems, the old line becomes a point of departure.

As if Elliott was secretly muttering under his breath. Let us go!

Us? No no no no no thank you. This is where our paths are going to separate.

The problem for later readers, and maybe for us, is that in many cases,

the month that was thrown in books like Lightning Strike is Eminent Victorians Stuck?

Uh, did you want see Shelley plain? And did he stop and speak to you?

Asks the speaker in Browning's poem memorabilia. But it became much harder to see Browning and his contemporaries plain once

the modernists turned them into caricatures of respectability and repression.

Often by adding a little barnacles of rumour like covered piano legs that over the years gradually develop into accepted facts.

And for more on this process, the difference between our image of the Victorians and how they really behave.

I can recommend a book by Matthew Sweets called Inventing the Victorians.

Matthew Sweet Inventing the Victorians.

So one outcome of this process then, was that the Victorian aspects of Victorian poetry came to be thought of as not only a matter of,

uh, chronology, but also a matter of style.

Victorian poetry came to signify writing that was, uh, twee or something.

It was sentimental or it was jingoistic.

It meant that by the time Virginia Woolf came to write her novel To the Lighthouse,

all she needed for Mr. Ramsay to seem pompous and out of touch was to make him wander around reciting Tennyson's The Charge of a Light Brigade.

And it's easy to understand why.

This is a poem that's often been read as the lofty public voice of the poet laureate, thoughtlessly glorifying military sacrifice.

But if you listen closely. Even the charge of a light brigade has another voice tucked away inside it, a quieter, more reflective voice.

Reminding us why the OED cites Tennyson as one of the first writers to use the term self-involved.

Self-involved. Um, so here are the opening two stanzas for you.

Um, half a league, half a league, half a league.

Onwards. All in the Valley of Death road.

The 600 for the light Brigade. Charge for the guns, he said into the Valley of Death road to 600 for the Light Brigade.

Was there a man dismayed? Not, though the soldier knew someone had blundered.

There's not to make reply. There's not to reason why there's but to do and die.

Into the valley of death. Rode the 600.

Um, Tennyson said he wrote this poem after hearing, or rather reading the phrase some hideous blunder in the times,

and that phrase then became the rhythmical seed of his response as those regular dark tales of half a league,

half a league, half a league establish a an unstoppable momentum, a narrative pulse of doom.

But it's not just the war reports in the Times that Tennyson's poem is in dialogue with.

It was first published in the 9th of December 1854 issue of The Examiner,

a weekly journal that contains a miscellany of news and comments and looks at in this context.

It's surrounded by many other voices.

By a whole series of what the literary theorist genre Janette might call para texts, para texts that question it and I qualify it.

So anyone picking up the examiner that week would have found plenty of other responses to the crime in conflict.

There were articles on the siege of Sebastopol and on the Austrian Treaty.

Uh, there was news about military reinforcements. There was a short piece on the Peace Society.

There was an account of a French general shot through the lung, who,

when he was finally persuaded to send for a priest, cried out, why do you not pity me?

Is my wounds not glorious? And that wasn't the only article that had strange echoes of Tennyson's poem.

And many of the other pages that surrounded the charge of a light brigade worked a bit like funfair mirrors,

producing a whole series of distorted reflections all its.

For instance, there was half a page of military promotions that were a bit curious.

Uh, there was news of a man whose horse had taken fright at a passing railway engine, leapt into canal and drowned in.

And. And finally there was a review of Charles Matthews's latest farce of the Lyceum Theatre,

which was called Aggravating Sam and which the Examiner's theatre critic pointed out,

contains many characters, of whom all and each are brought into a high state of excitement.

But. Who is Charles Matthews? Well, he was the son of another Charles Matthews, Dickens's favourite actor,

who achieved fame in the 1820s and 1930s with what he called a mono poly logs.

These were farces in which he played all the roles, swapping facial expressions and voices like a series of hats.

And that's another way of thinking about and reading this issue of the examiner as a series of different perspectives on the same basic plots,

but a fine line the charged the Light Brigade goes a stage further because it overlaps different perspectives on top of each other.

Uh, let me explain what I mean by this. The word verse comes from the Latin word that had a meaning to turn.

That's had to turn and. And you notice how Tennyson uses his line endings to imagine the possibility of the

cavalry turning away or turning back before their momentum carries them onwards.

Half a league, half a league. Line break.

Half a league onward. An individual phrase.

These two are more equivocal than first meets the eye.

So there is but to do and die. Flattens out that gung ho cry of do all die into the tragic inevitability of do and die.

Similarly, someone had blundered with that little gap between some and one pauses over the guilt of an individual.

In the way that someone might pass over too quickly.

Um, even the dactyl metre. Um.

Thump thump thump thump thump thump thump thump thump allows us to hear the events unfolding from two different perspectives at once.

There's the point of view of the cavalry measuring out the distance to the guns with every hoof beats.

Hopefully half the league, half the league onwards, but also from the point of view of their horrified observers.

Who were unable to stop them charging to their deaths.

Half a league. Oh my lord. Half a league.

They're carrying on half a league onwards.

And while Tennyson's neatly ordered verse shows perhaps the danger of duty hardening into a rigid pattern.

It also puts up a little bit of resistance.

Finding space for doubts and second thoughts in those speech rhythms that snag against the underlying meta.

When Tennyson read not so, the soldier knew someone had blundered.

His voice swooped on that word new, suggesting how differently things could have turned out if the soldiers hadn't simply followed orders.

And the result of all that is a poem that quietly reminds us of the many different ways that we might wonder at that kind of behaviour.

You can wonder at something by being curious about it, but also a little sceptical of it.

Incidentally, you can hear Tennyson himself reading the poem if you want a recording made in in 1890.

Uh, there's the poetry. It's a website called Poetry Archive, or one word.org poetry.

Archive.org. Um, if you do listen to it, I should warn you that it was made, of course, on a wax cylinder.

Um, then I think somebody stored it next to a radiator.

The wax. And that can melt, um, a little unstable.

So although at the time when it was recorded, Tennyson, where he's got a rich Lincolnshire voice,

it would have sounded more like the awfully Catholic of Billy.

Onward. Um, now it sounds like a dog drowning in treacle.

Um, is there a harmonic, uh, filling? Uh.

And, um. Uh, it's a very good impression.

If you don't trust me, go and, uh, hear of yourself.

Um, anyway, um, the point of this is that, um, the charge, the Light Brigade is a good example, then,

of what T.S. Eliot meant when he described Tennyson as the most instinctive rebel against the society in which he was the most perfect conformist.

It's a great phrase, the most instinctive rebel against the society in which he was the most perfect conformist.

Um, so, as in so many of his poems, what starts off as a single voice quickly splits and multiplies as Tennyson's public voice,

the voice of the poet laureate, finds itself incorporating what Geoffrey Hill has called the antiphonal voice of the heckler.

It's another great phrase, the antiphonal voice of the heckler.

Uh, it's a phrase that comes from Geoffrey Hill's discussion about George Eliot's, uh, in his essay called Redeeming the Time.

So once again, then the dialogue of the mind with itself produces a dialogue of the poem with itself.

And it doesn't stop there, because in 1855, Tennyson republished the poem in a book entitled Maus and Other Poems.

The charge of the Light Brigade was the final poem in the collection that began with Maud

and Maud is a long moment from that concludes with the speaker going off to the Crimea,

comforting himself with the thought that I embrace the purpose of God and the doom assigns so published together,

each pine sets up reproachful echoes in the other one.

Each one is completed, but also subverted by the other one.

I've already talked about Arnold's dialogue of the mind with itself, and Armstrong's dialogue of the poem with itself.

Well, here we have an example of how the different voices of Victorian poetry can set up a dialogue of the book with itself.

Now, I've spent some time on this example.

Because I think it suggests several features you're likely to find in many other Victorian poems as you as you read them this,

this term, um, there's the instability of the poet's voice.

There's the fact that these poems often contain critical reflections on themselves,

like a a set of footnotes that have been quietly incorporated into the main text.

And above all, there's the importance of form.

Now, of course, Victorian poetry contains its fair share of second hand, second rate bits of diversifying.

The best poems that I think you'll find. The best poems are the results of what happens when tradition encounters innovation.

A bit like Tennyson's awkward dactyl in The Charge of the Light Brigade.

They come about when a standard form is warped slightly, is deformed, or is reformed,

particularly in response to the poet's feelings that old shapes might no longer fit new experiences.

So this is also what happens to the sonnet when it's stretched out by Hopkins.

So 16 lines like a body on the rack or indeed by Meredith and his sequence in Modern Love again, a 16 line sonnet,

a series of sonnets that chart the breakdown of a marriage and so are full of off kilter rhythms and rhymes that fail to match properly.

Like bodies that are forgotten how to kiss. And sometimes this sort of tussle happens at the level of individual lines.

So men pass me by. Tennyson writes.

Christians with happy countenances. And the disintegration of the rhythm suggests that this is only a sensitive mind and not in unity with itself.

As the title describes him, but also someone not in unity with other people either.

His voice doesn't things. It falls out of a traditional social rhythm.

And the same thing happens in Browning's dramatic monologues again and again.

The underlying pulse of the verse gestures towards social conventions, common ideals, while the rhythms of the speaker's voice.

Snagging against that metre reveal an individual who's busy trying to distinguish himself or herself from the crowd,

or finds that their their life doesn't fit into that kind of pattern.

So why? Why was Victorian poetry so, so restlessly, so relentlessly experimental?

Why are Victorian poets so, so self-conscious about what they're up to and so worried about whether or not they're up to it?

Well. Let me briefly suggest two possible reasons.

There are many, but here are just two. The first.

Is that this was an age that thought of itself chiefly as one of industry and commerce, rather than poetry.

So Matthew Arnold summed up the national mood, I think, in a letter he sent to his friend and fellow poet Arthur Cluff in 1849,

reflects how deeply unpolitical the age and all one surroundings are.

UN profound, not un grand, not unmoving, but unpolitical.

And that word unpolitical. Slightly archaic, slightly arch.

It contains and it carries. Arnold's fears that poetry was increasingly the relic of a bygone age.

It's noticeable in the hands of a novelist like Dickens.

Again, the characters who appeal to poetry tend to be either ancient or fraudulent or both.

Like the simpering crone Mrs. Scutum in Dumbarton.

Son. Oh, cried Mrs. Skuse, and with a faded little scream of rapture.

The castle is charming. Associations of the middle age.

Isn't all that, she said. Truly exquisite. Don't you dare to pop in the Middle Ages, Mr. Kafka.

Very much indeed, said Mr. Kafka.

Such charming times, cried Cleopatra, so full of faith, so vigorous and forcible, so picturesque, so perfectly removed from commonplace, so dear.

If you would only leave us a little more of the poetry of existence in these terrible days.

Um. Elsewhere. It's true how it's worse still defended in traditional terms as as leaders or as prophets.

Uh, Carlyle wrote an essay called The Hero.

As poet Elizabeth Barrett Browning referred to poets as the only truth tellers.

Now left to God. But at the same time, there remain this nagging sense that the poet's time had gone.

Reproductions of John Martin's painting The Bard's.

Based on the Welsh tradition that Edward the First ordered every bards to be put to

death and increasingly came to represent the gap between the poets and their audience.

That was more than just physical. You can see him there at the top on the on the cliff with his, uh, cloak billowing outs.

Um, the imitation of the birds, the eagle's wings, um, just above him, uh, while and below, uh,

the pygmy, like, um, uh, soldiers of Edwards are, uh, kind of dwarfed by his his some his grandeur.

Um. Wordsworth's question.

Whither is fled to the visionary gleam? Where is it now?

The glory and the dream carries on, reverberating across the century.

It was a question that had given mankind a shock. According to Hopkins.

And even towards the end of the century, he said, the tremble from it was still spreading.

And poets might have been especially nervous about how to grapple with Wordsworth's

question what did it mean to be a Victorian poet and therefore to be a post romantic poet?

Was the post element of post romantic, a natural extension.

Or was it an unnecessary supplement? Were Victorian poets carrying on their predecessors good work.

Or were they suffering from what the critic Harold Bloom would call later the anxiety of influence?

A fear that all the good tunes had already been sung.

When Arnold himself wrote about wandering between two worlds, one dead, the other powerless to be born.

He was mostly thinking about the decline of religious faith.

He might also been reflecting on his own situation as a poet.

Victorian poetry. Two was caught between two worlds.

Keen to find a voice that was suitable for modern life.

Terrified it might only be able to offer a thin parody of what had come before.

It produces a painful ambiguity in another one of Arnold's line,

another line in this poem where he writes the best of silence, now the best of silence.

Does that mean the real poets are all dead?

Or that nobody with any sense would dream of breaking into song.

Now the best are silent now.

And this brings us to a second reason for Victorian poetry's self doubts.

It already had a truly modern rival.

The novel. And for many critics at the time, this was a form far better suited to a increasingly messy and noisy and democratic age.

Dickens or George Eliot singled out individual characters, but they wrote for the crowds.

And here the poet had two possible responses.

The first was to refuse to compete by writing for a narrow audience of like minded souls.

Or by treating poems as a form of escapism. Let's take just one example.

Um, Austin Dobson's The Balance of Prose and Rhyme was published in the first in the same issue

of Belgravia magazine as the first instalments of Hardy's novel The Return of the native.

And Dobson makes it clear he's marking out a very different territory for himself, very different to Hardy's serious, socially conscious novel.

So Dobson writes, when the waves are heavy with my interrupts in November, folks.

In November and December snows when the north wind howls and the doors are shut.

There is pleasant enough the panes of prose. But whenever a scent from the white thorn blows, and the jasmine stars of the casement climb.

And a Rosalind face, the lattice shows, then hey,

for the ripple of laughing rhyme and wincing the awful though this is the underlying desire is plain, I think.

With its pastoral echoes, with its arc.

Hey isms with a hey, that's almost half way to hey nonny no.

This is an exercise in cultural nostalgia.

If Hardy offers the return of the native. This is more like a return to the native.

Dobson's poem is presented to us as like a little time machine.

Designed to transport us back to a simpler past.

So that's one possible response to the rise of the novel.

The second response, in fact, was to tackle it on its own terms, or even in its own terms,

by borrowing the novel's linguistic informality and its loose construction,

and then trying to accommodate these things in a more flexible poetic form to make poetry, then a bit more like prose.

Um, take the case of Elizabeth Barrett Browning's verse novel, or Lee, according to her speak.

Her poets, she says, enjoy a twofold life.

Because they are ordinary men and women. But they also are expected to transcend ordinary life in their writing.

In her own poem, Aurora Lee embodies this two fold life in itself because much of its scaffolding is borrowed from contemporary fiction.

Things like a romantic plot, the outlines of a Kunstler Omar or artists novel.

Aurora Lee tells the story of how someone became the poet, just as Dickens's David Copperfield tells the story of how someone became a novelist.

But Aurora doesn't only echo fiction and its characters in its events.

It also echoes fiction in the way it tries to capture the the clutter and the contingency of modern life.

Its air of ramshackle improvisation.

Or what the poem itself describes as the full voiced, heaving, double breasted age.

And the result of all this is writing that.

Frequently bulges as it tries to accommodate the teeming life going on all around it.

And sometimes it sounds as if it's splitting apart at the seams.

So I've given you here a sample passage where Aurora is arguing that poetry shouldn't simply retreat into the past.

And she says, NE, if there's room for poets in this world a little overgrown, I think there is.

Their sole work is to represent the age.

Their age. Oh, Charlemagne's this living throbbing age that brawls, cheats, madness, calculates, aspires and spends more passions,

more heroic heat between the mirrors of its drawing rooms than Ronal with his knights raw civil.

So. This comes as part of a larger explanation of how poets should exert a double vision, according to Browning,

meaning they should examine distant events closely, but also provide a sense of perspective for events that lie closer to home.

And her own blank verse does exactly what it recommends.

Individual lines. Allow a speaker you notice to isolate key details of modern life, like mirrors in drawing rooms.

But as each line leads on to the next one, she locks those details into larger patterns.

Repeatedly. The writing zooms in and then zooms out again.

Like someone switching between a telephoto lens and a wide angle lens.

Is if lines of poetry can be used like lines of perspective in the way that they use the descriptions.

Um, but at the same time, you might also notice how the speaker's voice shows the strain of trying to fit so much into a fixed literary structure.

So? So when she explains that the poet's words work is to represent their age, the age,

their age, not Charlemagne's, this life throbbing age, you notice how the rhythm wobbles.

And then writes itself. And then spills over by an extra syllable.

As if quietly admitting that the regular pulse of verse is always going to struggle to pin down the irregular impulses of real life.

And the overall effect of all this is ambiguous. And you could read these lines as verse breaking down into prose,

a bit like an emblem of the way that poetry gave way to the novel in the period as a whole.

On the other hand, though, you could read them as verse emerging from prose.

An emblem of how poetry could still find a place for itself, even in an age that seemed ready to overwhelm it.

Now, of course, Aurora isn't the only Victoria long Victorian poem that uses blank verse um, Tennyson's Idols of the King Robert Browning's The Ring.

In the book, many more use the same form, possibly because it has no fixed centre and no natural resting place.

In theory, a blank verse epic can go on as long as the poet wants it to.

As one title, multi-talented Humpty Dumpty Tom follows another, endlessly adapting itself to every new incident, every passing mood.

And that's why then it's why a poem like Aurora OReilly gives its readers something more than a set of finished thoughts.

It gives us the sound of somebody thinking.

And that was one possible response to a rapidly changing world.

It was to write in a way that embraced uncertainty, embraced possible surprises.

The alternative. Was to treat poetry like a cultural break.

Or what Matthew Arnold described as a stay.

In poetry, he said in 1850 1918 poetry.

The spirit of our race will find its consolation and stay.

What he meant by stay was a device for supporting or steadying a structure.

Uh, the hope was that poetry as something that was written into the history of the language, part of the very fabric of civilisation.

Poetry could provide readers with little resting places.

Or refugees. Places from where they could gain some perspective on the changes going on around them.

And that's why he offered what he called touchstones.

He gave readers a series of little touchstones, which were small samples of the best writing he thoughts produced in the past,

against which readers could then test every new book that was trying to catch their eye.

So literally a conservative aim, uh, a way of trying to conserve the past, conserve its values.

Learn from earlier writers. Follow in their footsteps.

But the danger with that,

the danger with this approach is how easily poets you try to be cautious and considered might simply find themselves getting stuck in a rut.

Other hints of this, even in Victorian poems, which, uh, are expressing an enthusiasm for progress.

Like Tennyson's Locksley Hall. Forward, forward!

Let us range, he writes. Let the great world spin forever down the ringing grooves of change.

Well, hey, you might notice how forward forward stutters on the page while picking up the traction that's needed to move on.

You might notice how change keeps the word range carefully within earshot.

Even Tennyson's reference to railway wheels suggests his ambivalence about progress.

Wheels revolve. And Tennyson was always much keener on revolutions that involved predictable movements rather than violence.

Change. Wheels were like the industrial version of that gradualist model of progress he described in another poem,

The Golden Year, where he writes that human things were turning on themselves.

Move onward just like a railway wheel.

Or put another way. They were the perfect metaphor for a poet who T.S Eliot said, believed explicitly in progress and believed implicitly.

The progress consists in things remaining much as they are.

Now in the hands of other poets. Even that sort of stuttering and halting progress can produce some vivid local effects.

As you know, most poetry is based on repetition.

It's driven on by the motives of rhythm.

Rhyme. Refrain. And Victorian poets can be brilliantly playful when creating a lyric voice out of these basic literary building blocks.

Um, I've given you two examples on your handout and on the screen here.

Uh, the first is the opening of a poem by James Henry, not to be confused with Henry James.

Uh, James Henry and another and another and another and still another sunset and sunrise.

With the echo of Macbeth tomorrow and tomorrow,

and tomorrow adds a tone of resigned despair to a life in which every day is different and yet the same.

The second example, uh, more famous one is, uh, Christina Rossetti's lines from in the Bleak Midwinter.

Snow had fallen. Snow on snow, snow on snow, beautifully capturing the steady drift of snow flakes that,

at first sight, are as indistinguishable from each other as repetitions of the word snow.

Snow on snow. Snow on snow.

Words then as a form of figurative snowfall.

Both of these examples answer Arnold's hope that poetry might provide culture with a form of stay, a chance to slow down.

What one of James Henry's a tourists had referred to as this present hurrying age.

This presents a hurrying age. The danger, of course, with that kind of repetition would be that it didn't sound like the essence of poetry,

but its opposite, a kind of meaningless chanting.

And this too is something that Victorian poets confronted.

I'm Adrienne Rich. Uh, the brilliant American poet, um, once pointed out that every poem breaks a silence that has to be overcome.

What a writer like Tennyson seems just as haunted by the opposite prospect.

His poems breaking down, returning to the silence from which they had come.

Um, let me give you an example. These very famous lines. Brake, brake, brake on by cold grey stones.

Oh, see. And I would that my tongue could utter the thoughts that arise in me.

It's not till we cross the blank space between the first line and the second line.

We realise the speaker is appealing to the sea.

On its own. The first line doesn't give us any clues about how we should interpret it.

Brake, brake, brake. Is this a new day?

Reluctance to dawn. Is it a modern version of Kent's line in King Lear?

Break hearts, I prithee. Break.

Or actually, as Vladimir Nabokov once rather tartly pointed out.

For all we know, it might be a boxing referee talking in his sleep.

Break, break. Break.

Putting three stresses in a row like that is also unusual, because a poem in which every word was stressed would no longer be a poem.

So from the very start, then Tennyson's line reveals how close lyrical speech can come to meaningless babble.

And that's a painful thing for any writer to admit. And it's something a great deal of Victorian poetry worries about and worries about out loud.

It's not just that Victorian poets often write about suicidal figures.

Their own poems sometimes seem in two minds about whether or not even they should exist.

Sometimes they trail away to nothing like the mouse's tail.

In Alice's Adventures in Wonderland. Sometimes they use their own line endings to, as it were, flirts with mutinous.

Like the speaker of Tennyson's The Two Voices,

Victorian poems can seem torn between one voice that's all for life and another one that keeps asking itself.

It not better not to be.

We're only. We've got a few minutes left.

Um, and so far, I've suggested a few reasons for the, um, intense self-consciousness of many Victorian poets.

And I've outlined a few of the ways that they responded by, uh, by turning, uh, to narrative,

uh, by retreating into traditional forms, uh, by nervously playing out their fears on the page.

What this means, in effect, is that some of the most famous Victorian poems enjoy a peculiar kind of double vision.

In which they keep one eye on the world of their readers and another eye on their own workings.

That is, whatever the poems claim to be about. Often their real subject turns out to be, at least in part, themselves.

As they worry about how they been written, who they've been written for.

And even what will happen to them once they leave. The poet study.

And in practice. And what this means is that when we pick a Victorian poem up and read it, often,

what seems like a simple lyrical or narrative surface can be sitting on top of all sorts of more complex, more troubling undercurrents.

In Tennyson's early play The Devil and the lady that he wrote in teenager.

Um, he describes what a tapestry usually conceals, the dark reverse of its, he says,

the intertwining and rough wanderings of random threads and wayward colourings.

That I think might be a model for a good deal of Victorian poetry, where beautiful designs often mask a whole host of loose threads and tangles.

It's also, I think, a good model for what critics have done to Victorian poetry over the years.

So anthologies have tried to tidy it up into a settled body of texts.

Interpreters have tried to explain away its sheer strangeness.

But as I've been trying to suggest throughout this lecture,

even the simplest looking Victorian poems often hint at more than one meets the eye or for the ear.

And each one works like a lens to refocus our expectations about how it works and and what it's for.

Uh, and that's why, um, today, I'm not going to ends with a neat conclusion.

Instead, I'm going to end with, uh, just a handful of examples from one highlights from Hopkins that give some sense,

I think, of how wonderfully rich and provocative and strange Victorian poetry can be.

Uh. So from the winds hover. The achieve of the mastery of thing.

That's one model of writing. Uh, a formal achievement and mastery of your subjects.

Uh, what about, uh, the second one? This is from, um, pieds beauty.

Um, all things counter original.

Spare. Strange. It's also another model of writing something that makes us look again what we thought we knew.

Some Victorian poems aim one, some aim at the other.

The best though the best manage both at once.

Like Hopkins's description of conkers as fresh fire coal chestnut falls.

A line that imagines how the green husk splits open.

To reveal something that's as, um, fresh and as alive as a flame.

And ultimately, I think that's what all the best Victorian poetry does it.

It peels off the dull covering of the world until it looks raw and new.

Uh, thank you so much for listening. Um, if you're a first year students, I guess you'll be back here at 2:00.

Where, again, it's more of me. I'm so sorry. Um, uh, what I'll be looking at, um, what is literature?

All of it in, um, in 50 minutes. So, uh, before that, have a nice lunch.

I'll see you back later.

