[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
Um, I'm Sophie Ratcliffe, and this is a lecture about Victorian realism.

And I've been looking forward to talking about this all week.

Uh, the first part of the lecture is going to be a bit of a discussion about why you should care about this topic at all,

and why I hope by the time I'm over that you'll be as excited about it as I am and realise that actually, fundamentally,

this is this is so, so, so central to what we're thinking about as humans.

Um, and I'm going to begin with

a question. Um, and it's question about really what is real and where the real is out there.

I mean, we're so windowless, it's hard to work out this strange sort of simulacrum of an environment. Is real

somewhere out there? Is real in here how, we perceive it?

And the question of, I want to talk about when we say real to whom?

Um, I also want to press on the idea that when we talk about real, I will get on to realism,

but when we talk about the real, um, we are in a territory that's deeply political.

Um. So I'd like you to take a moment, if there is someone sitting beside you,

if not, you'll have to talk to yourself about something that you've seen in the media this week

that depends on a contested idea of reality, a contested idea of what really happened.

So I'll give you a couple of minutes or six seconds to talk about

So where you ended up in your discussion, I think you might have ended up reflecting on the question of,

I mean, even what you decided to talk about depends on what media source you've been

looking at and what is considered to be important enough or real enough to frame.

Um. So I think you probably might be in an area

of thinking about censorship, propaganda, spin, sources. And I hope just that moment just reconfirmed the question that real really matters.

So I want to think about how those big political questions,

about the idea of what is real, relate to the literary idea of realism.

And throughout this lecture, I'm going to try my best to keep three ideas distinct.

You may catch me out like sort of bingo and say you just did it Sophie,

but generally I want to keep distinct the question of the real, which is a philosophical and pragmatic concept relating to power.

In the 18th century, Doctor Johnson kicked a rock and said,

like he refuted the idea that everything is in our head by the fact that that was really there, a philosophical concept.

So that's one thing. Realistic, which is a matter of judgement.

I mean, you might say this has been the worst week of my life.

And some would say that's really not very realistic. Like I'm having the worst time of anyone in the world.

That's not realistic. That's a matter of judgement and that also relates to power. And realism, which is a literary genre.

And that I hope to show, also relates to questions of power.

So to highlight as an important aside, that the words realism and the word real and the word realistic mean completely different things.

They don't mean the same thing and keep them really as you write, as you think.

I think it's our ethical duty to keep these things distinct, to think about what we mean when they say them.

Say them. Realistic is a is a really problematic word that's not realistic.

Um, it's a bit like the word common sense. Like sorry, whose? Whose common sense in what world?

What's common? Um. Okay. Now some stuff.

I'm going to begin with an anecdote from a journal, a 19th century journal called The Amateur Photographer.

This is, uh, 1885,

and it puts into relief how questions of what is real or how we represent what was seen to be real is kind of part of everyday culture.

Um, and this is the sort of strap line of it for amateur photographer to hold, as twere, the mirror up to nature.

And here is my anecdote. It's about a young girl who's sort of doing what you might call an amateur selfie.

This is she had never been satisfied with the portraits which professional photographers had made for her.

She felt sure that her sweetest expression had not been caught by the camera,

as she often saw it in her mirror, having a camera with the usual attachment for taking instantaneous views.

She spent her leisure hours for a week or two and, making negatives of her own visage.

A string hitched to the trigger of the instrument enables up to be both operator and subject, and thus in the privacy of her chamber.

She transfers her smiles or frowns to the place to be subsequently developed into photographs, in case she deems some worth it.

She has thus far made 167 different pictures of herself.

Um. So there's something ludicrous about this.

It reminds me of the times when they don't really exist anymore.

But they used to be.

That's still awesome photo booths, but you used to have to have your passport photo taken in photo booth where they printed them out,

rather than the ones where you go into the dry cleaners and they take them against a blank screen,

or you're trying to find a white wall in your house in the sense that you have three shots.

They show you the images, and then you keep going by a sort of super sticker vanity, and then you lose it.

She's gone for 167 different pictures of herself.

But I think there's something in this anecdote that is more than simple minded vanity or conceit.

There's something about this girl's conviction. It's presented in this journal as a sort of funny story.

They call it American freaks, like how silly this girl is,

but she's she's the suggestion that the representation does not capture how she really authentically thinks she looks.

Sort of hopeless. Conflict between the limits of expression, the limits of representation, and her ideal notion of her true self.

Um. It also highlights, if you look at the in the journal itself,

questions of how journals and the press at the time were trying to authenticate themselves,

not about her representing her real self, but the journal itself saying if you send stuff into us,

it must be authenticated by the name and address of the sender.

This increasing concern I've spoken in other lectures about the increase in print circular circulation,

and people thinking that people will be making up their names, making up their addresses, making up their sources, and sending them in fake news.

So it's saying, no, this is real. This this city story is real.

Okay. What is realism?

In a literary sense. If I asked you, you might be able to tell me what you think it isn't.

You might think, well, it's not melodrama. It's not sensation.

It's not magic realism. It's not a story where someone sort of a wardrobe turns into a tiger.

It's not the Gothic, and it's not a fairy tale.

But what is it? Um. To answer that question, I'm going to really highlight the way in which descriptions of realism have been contested over time.

So what follows is quite a lot of quotations.

Um, and I'm going to try and highlight some of the different positions that they are taking, some of them historical,

some of their most recently critical to highlight, um, how this concept has been thrown around this.

You're never going to need to know all of these things,

but if you want to make a steak about how a particular author is playing with ideas of realism, it's useful to know what's been going on.

And what if for conversations in the arguments to be had.

Um, so this isn't very helpful. Uh, Matthew Beaumont and Anna Despard, to put it in, saying it's it's really hard to pin down.

So that doesn't really help us at all. Um, but Howells in the so that but that's sort of late 20th century definition.

Whereas Howells is very clear realism is nothing more and nothing less than the truthful treatment of material.

But this raises already many questions, as I said, kind of talking about what you chose to discuss when I said turn to each other.

What is material? Which material?

And what is truthful treatment? Theodore Dreiser in 1903.

Seems pretty clear as well. The seeing of what is the realisation of truth?

Um, so one proposition for you, and this is not the definition,

a proposition is that realism might be a kind of writing that has a particular

style concurrent with its ambition of transparently representing the world.

I mean, I've got some caveats over the well, you might have caveats over the word transparent.

And what about world? Like which bits of the world?

Um, if you've ever come across what George Orwell said, that language should be as clear as a window pane, that idea.

But then again, by saying, by using a simile, Orwell has already complicated the idea that language is clear,

because now language is like the window pane, which makes it sort of matea somehow, because language could be like a butterfly.

Um. Right.

This is Nigel Weil saying, hang on, any any that kind of supposition that we could have something called realism,

which is transparently representing the world, is simple minded and deceptive.

Because if you haven't shown the author's hand, if you haven't said, hey, this is a representation, you just said it's a mirror.

Like with no, you're not showing the frame of the mirror. He's saying it's deceptive.

It's problematic, has unexamined assumptions.

The difference between you saying.

Here's what this war looks like versus I stood here in this position from this subject position with this this equipment.

Talk to these people. And this is the picture I took. This is what it is.

Here's my representation. And he's saying this kind of idea of realism being transparency is really problematic.

So. Here's another idea about realism writing that has a moral and political imperative.

To sort of be democratic. To repair cracks.

And this in many ways, is what the historical roots of the word realism in a literary sense was.

The realist novel. Um, Rachel Bowlby saying was in the spirit of democratising movements.

Here's some historical back up if you want to read more about this.

There's a great book. There used to be just one copy of it in Oxford back in the day when I was a grad student, um, in the Modern Languages library,

and it's called by George Becker and it's called Documents of Modern Literary Realism, and it is now available online.

And you can look them all up, and it has a document of the documents about what different novelists in the 19th century

and early 20th century have said about their sort of this is what I think realism is.

This is what I think often and things like prefaces to their novels. So that's a really useful source.

He's a shield to conquer. And he says that it kind of his idea of realism is allied to what he calls living in democracy.

But it's intriguing that he thinks realism is allied to writing novels about what he calls the lower classes.

And you obviously might think that this is problematic. Sorry. And I'm going to talk about this later.

Why? Why aren't working class individuals more real than anyone else?

That's a real problem. But it but it comes his his spirit is its democratising, its liberal and its reality.

To write a realist novel, we need to write about everyone. And we need to write about people who haven't usually been in novels.

George Eliot, um, she has a sort of ethical, again, idea of realism.

Faithful study of nature. Faithful. The sense of it being a realist novel is something ethical.

Realist writer is something ethical. Um.

I'm going to move to thinking about which novels are might be seen as realist.

If I ran a list through of them. Sorry, my slightly tiny bit out of order.

You might think if I asked you to name some realist novels, we might end up with someone like George Eliot, Elizabeth Gaskell, Henry James,

George Gissing, and you might the Brontes, and then you might be struck by how very white and how primarily gendered male this list is.

So if I were going to add a list of realist novels,

I'd encourage you to look at writers in America writing about individuals of colour to try and expand the canon.

If you look at a document about the realist novel written in 1990, you will get that list.

And we need to expand what we consider to be realist novels. So I'd like to turn to a novel by, um, someone called Hannah Crofts,

which I think offers an interesting test case against those ideas I suggested earlier.

We know, I said, I can't really tell you what realism is.

Is it holding up the mirror to nature in a sort of transparent way, or is it some sort of political or ethical?

Manifesto writing with that kind of idea. Is it something faithful or is it so?

Kind of. Is it to what is it? And I'm going to try and unsettle that with this novel by Hannah Crofts.

It was probably written by an African-American woman. It was never published.

So what you're saying is the first page of the manuscript.

Um, scholars think that she might have been enslaved for a period of her life and then traded and escaped.

She. Some have speculated that she was, in fact, a white writer.

Concocting this story. She might have been your heritage, but the best evidence to date is, was, in fact, that she was a woman called Hannah Bond.

Um, and that she escaped enslavement from a plantation in North Carolina in 1857.

Um, it's. Yeah, the novel's concerned with being trafficked, uh, trying to escape abuse and find a place that is safe.

Um, the heroine is called Hannah, and she is at some point a companion to a lady.

And there are multiple in intersections and hierarchies of power in this novel in relation to education, race, and colourism.

Different individuals have different levels of power. Back to the subject.

Is it a realist novel? Well, in some ways it is, because it's a fiction that represents things that really might happen.

There are no sort of flying cars in it. Um, it's it it shows a commitment to understanding the lives of those in difficulty.

So. And particularly those who might be marginalised. So in some ways it kicks in to some of those ideas that we are saying, well, it's,

it's not that, but for my purposes, it allows us to complicate some definitions of realism.

This is the opening one, though. It's kind of somewhere near the opening.

This is Hannah Crofts, the heroine, describing learning to read.

I settled myself with a book behind the heavy damask curtains that shaded the windows.

This might. If you know Gina, ring a bell.

And then this is another section where she describes the American countryside that she is in.

If you know bleak House. This might again ring a bell.

So crafts we can presume or scholars have argued, found these passages from Dickens and Bronte.

She would have read the Dickens in Frederick Douglas's newspaper, The North Star,

and then she wrote her own novel [INAUDIBLE] memoir, depending on what we think it is building on these.

And so this novel, one thing is it serves to highlight the fact.

That if realism is about stuff that really happens.

I remember I wasn't saying it was. I was offering that as an idea then.

Reading novels is something that really happens.

We actually do read them and so represents the nations of reality, get tied up with representations of art.

Life starts to model art. Here's another complicating factor.

I mean, if you want the best example of this at all, it's, um, flow.

Best novel, Madame Bovary, which is about a woman.

It's a realist novel about a woman who reads a lot of romantic novels and then starts to live her life like a romantic novel,

which is actually created the word Bovary ism, which means you're living your life out like you think you are in a novel.

Um. So I'd also like to use the bond women's narrative to complicate another idea, which is the idea.

As I said, we know what the realist novel is. It's not a ghost story.

It's not melodrama. Well, here's, um, Hannah and she's talking to a character called Joe who's illiterate.

Hannah begins being illiterate and then is taught to read. And Joe, the illiterate slave in the he's a field slave.

And this is where the intersections happen. So Hannah, who's a house slave, looks down on Joe because there's a power and she thinks he's uneducated.

He's very much, in some ways modelled on Joe, the crossing sweeper in bleak House.

He has limited language, and he's describing here seeing a ghost in this.

And you can see that the writer has kind of tried to kind of trans the way he's speaking.

So there's a generic division between Hannah's realist narrative and Joe's gothic, ghostly narrative.

Which we might say is not realist or because it's an inferior.

But one might know to argue that that ghost story is his reality.

I'm going to come back to that.

I wanted to offer you this because, as an example, to highlight the fact that when we attempt to define a realist novel,

it really does depend on whose reality we see as primary. Is it the secular reality?

Is it one with one ontology? A match that imaginative works are part of reality.

Imagination is part of someone's reality,

and some people's reality might be far more melodramatic and far more horrific than other people might think.

It's possible. Let's look back at this idea.

This attack on realism is described by the critic Nigel Weil.

He said, um, I feel he says this in a really strong, nasal voice, really annoyed.

It's an unproblematic representation, unexamined response.

This is realism. Oh, crap. He seems to think, if this is true, we might as well throw a lot of 19th century realist novels in the bin.

Because what are they doing? Um, problematic?

Um, but such a description rashly is a bit pointless, because it radically underestimates how reflexive most novels that we call realist novels are,

how radically reflexive how they 19th century fiction is.

It's repeatedly conscious that it's not transparent, that it's not seeing everything.

That it's partial. You must have seen all the dear readers. And but why always, Dorothea?

It's constantly asking these questions. Um, this is George Eliot's Adam Bede, which is often rolled out as the second as an amazing example.

George Eliot is an amazing example of a realist novelist, but she begins this description of the afternoon sun and, uh, workman working,

which is congruent with the idea that a realist novel is democratising and looks at the raw material of working class individuals.

But actually she does this big sort of spellbinding.

Here I am, I'm I'm cooking this up for you.

I'm a sorcerer. There's nothing transparent about it.

A book you might find interesting, um, more fun than documents of modern literary realism,

which I do recommend for finding those really important quotes. But is Allison Bailey?

Are we nearly there yet? And she says that, um, almost all Victorian realist novels is a quote.

She says it's a kind of travel writing because she says that Victorian writers who were writing what we call realist novels were actually creating.

They weren't trying to hold the mirror up to nature. They were doing virtual reality.

They were trying to transport you somewhere. Um, so really interesting argument, which I recommend.

So if you're interested in this, I'd encourage you in your writing about Victorian novels to look out for moments when novels,

or indeed poems, are talking about their own workings or talking about constructions.

Another thing you can do is look up at when a novel talks about a work of art within it.

There are lots of them, say suddenly and in a novel someone, there's a tableau,

the fonts that you like, the characters get together, or a character reading in a novel.

Those moments, it doesn't have to be there are them memory to step forward.

So the narrator saying, I'm doing this, which are clearly author's hand.

But whenever a writer inscribes a work of art in their work,

it is a kind of metafictional touch that is really helpful for thinking about

questions of realism and the way in which it's properly monetising its own texture.

Decent conceit can be seen as conversations with ideas of realism and, well, making.

Um. I want to move on to a specific historical factor that has a distinct relationship with the idea of realism in the 19th century novel.

Because if we see realism is as a literary style that has a particular stake, often for political and ethical purposes,

with trying to represent the world, if not completely transparently, then roughly transparently to show hardship or difficulty.

As, as, as carefully as it can in order to make the world a better place as a sort of athletic, as a really bad paraphrase of what Eliot was up to.

Um, then we have to think about the fact that there was a big rival at this point in the mid to late 19th century,

and that was where my lecture began. Photography. In the 1820s, photography was remotely possible.

1840s more possible proliferating by the 1850s.

Um, it was all happening by this point on glass plates.

If you remember that anecdote about the girl, she was, um, she was, uh, said the light is, uh,

the plates are coated with a light sensitive fluid, which you drip over the plates, and then you open the shutter and you sit there.

Um, and the fact that photography was possible that there were these magazines called Amateur Photographer that everyone could do,

it raises questions for visual artists and for novelists about what they were meant to be doing.

Could. They could what they're offering be as good as what photography is offering.

Um, and if photo photography is actually holding the mirror up to nature.

My nieces. What? What are they meant to be doing?

So I'm going to look a little bit briefly at, um, a novel by Thomas Hardy.

It's not someone that many people have read. It's called A legacy, and it's one of his kind of known as his bad novels.

I like how these bad novels, I bunch prefer them in some ways to the ones that everyone loves,

like Tested, Death, Close and Far From the Madding Crowd. So earlier this year, um.

Rough plot point is about a woman, unbelievably, called Paula Power, um, who has a, uh,

her own house and her own gymnasium and her own telegraph, and she does regular exercises.

Um, and lots of people are in love with her trying to court her.

So in some ways she is a bit like, say, the character of Bathsheba Everdeen.

Like glamorous woman in Country Village. Everyone wants to marry her, but in some ways she's much more sort of cyber.

She's got all the tech, she's in her pink flannel bathing suits, which which she wears in her gymnasium, and there are these two guys ogling her.

Um. So there's a captain who really wants to marry Paula Power in a pink bathing suit.

Um, and she's undulating away. And this is the description of Hardy.

And Hardy is, in some ways, trying to highlight how difficult it is to use words to capture what is happening, what is real.

Um. Hardy is often described as being the most filmic of novels,

novelists that he's always trying to describe the way trying to almost use language to describe movement and distance.

Um, he had never seen the beauty of such a real and living sort as this.

Um, I like to see and, um, is interesting because the villain of it is a photographer.

His name? Is Dan, I think.

I think his name is Dan Dare. I think it's these names are so unlikely.

I feel I'm starting to make them up. His name is Dan something. Um, yeah.

William dare Dan there is in the Beano, the dandy William dare.

Um, but. So this scene has been set up by a photographer.

So Hardy has made the villain of a novel which is about complicated ideas of modernity and realism.

The photographer. And there's a really interesting point about where someone is set up in this novel through a forged photograph.

The photograph is meant to make our hero look drunk.

So the photograph has been blurred and the eyes have been changed.

So Hardy in some ways is offering a novel which is about high photography.

I know you exist, but you're not really all that because you two can be false.

Just a few more examples of just to prove people were worrying about the relationship between the photograph and the novel.

His aunt,

Fay Burton photography dealt a mortal blow to all modes of expression because in the 18th century got Fanny Burney describing herself as a novelist,

she says she is a camera obscura. She definitely sees the role of her as a novelist to sort of capture what is there.

Or. This is Cruickshank, who was Dickenss illustrator.

Midnight scenes and social photographs. They weren't photographs.

They were drawings. But he's sort of seeing himself as this capture of reality.

Hardy himself said, look, I was never trying to just hold the mirror up to nature anyway.

He's saying you kind of go to nature, but the results this is in the top quote is no mere photograph.

So Hardy is not so worried about this because he never thought that that's what a novelist should be doing.

And this is, um, from his biography, The Life of Thomas Hardy by Florence Emily Hardy.

But actually, Thomas wrote it. She he kind of. He said it was by Emily.

And then he goes wrote his own biography again.

What is real? Not the author there. But he said art is a disproportionate number of realities.

It's not realism. The.

Here are a few more quotations that I think are intriguing about people worrying about photography.

Trying to stop it being such a threat by highlighting how much cooking up goes in.

How much fakery goes into photography. George Bernard Shaw was actually he loved photography and had a lot of photographs.

He made a lot of photographs. He had himself photographed a lot. Um, but he was also he was he he felt that photo photography should be preserved.

You shouldn't be kind of doing the touching up afterwards.

Fashionable cooking and stippling of sitters faces.

So this is a kind of objection to for what Instagram filters really.

He's saying this is shocking. Um, here's an interesting, uh, illustration,

a cartoon trying to show how much of a palaver goes into what is seen as a natural headshot in the 19th century.

You can see the guy on the platform, his head in a sort of head brace.

Uh, someone having her makeup done in the bottom hand, some being powdered up.

This is the talk of a studio. Here's another, um, cartoon parody.

And how much goes together the amount of contortion.

Almost making photography seem like gothic torture.

Um. This quotation is appeared in a book called The British Tradesman and Other Sketches.

So it's notable that photography was seen as a tradesman art.

It was something. It was not like being a poet.

I'll come back to that idea in a moment. But. A.

Just wanted to show you a few more. This is an intriguing painting showing children against a background.

Apparently realist, but you can see the photo. This is this is this so very much a Victorian painting about representation?

You can see the portraits behind that. You used to have your portrait painted.

Now you're having your portrait photographed, but against the painted background.

Um. I'm just showing you these because I find them fascinating.

So these are from a project called Hidden Mothers. So, uh, scholars went and looked at baby photos in the 19th century.

So I'm showing you a baby photo. Um.

But how do I like to get a 19th century photo taken on a wet plate collodion plate?

You have to sit still for five minutes. Baby steps that sit still for five minutes.

So the mothers had to hide under the cloths.

Sometimes these were cropped quite well, but sometimes they were less well cropped, um, and even less well cropped.

Um, I just find these just quite, quite funny and quite spooky, actually.

It's hard to know whether really, that the odd or the oddity of these photos would have struck the 19th Victorian,

or whether they would almost have been a sort of realism seen through the hand of the creator in them.

I said that that cartoon with the guy with his head and clutch was from a cause called and the the traits of the British Tradesman and other sketches,

and that photography was seen by furniture as a tradesman art.

Um, and this is interesting because it brings us to the question of.

What I was talking about, about the political imperative to realism, to, uh, that I shared the slide with the theorist,

the novelist, the Goncourt talking about wanting to be democratic, liberalising and right about the lower classes.

I said, that's obviously a bit problematic,

that the real only exists by writers from the middle or upper classes writing about marginalised individuals.

I think this brings us to an interesting idea emerging in some realist fiction, and it's an anxiety about class.

If the most means of representation was increasingly coming into the hands of the working classes.

Photography. Literacy. Reading.

The bat. There seems to be now a boundary between the presenters.

And those they are representing. This is Zola in 1871.

Here's his idea. This is another example of a novelist saying,

what I'm going to do is take a load of what I regard to be the dregs of society, and write a novel about them.

And that's realism. He said he sounds like a scientist here.

He says, I want to explain how a family, a small group of human beings, comports itself in a society,

taking to account the twofold question of temperaments and environments.

I shall try to trace out the thread which leads mathematically from one man to another.

And when I hold a whole social group in my hands, I shall show this group in action.

Um. And you can see silk full tree. I mean, these weren't real people, but he imagined this group of people and wrote about them,

and he's almost suggesting he's doing something incredibly important and objective with these fitness fiction.

Um, and to a lesser extent, George Eliot's, talked about the important in the natural history of German life.

She talks about writing about the raw material of society.

But what happens when the raw material of society are no longer that raw,

because they themselves are writing and making things and taking photographs? And I think this is really interesting.

And you can see these little traces in some 19th century novels, what you might see,

sort of bad faith points where 19th century middle and upper class novelists write about

individuals from the working class fictional individuals as if they are in some way raw,

untouched by representation because it makes their novels seem more realist.

George Moore is a good example. George Moore is very much seen to be one of the kind of great examples of a realist writer,

because he wrote about, in some ways, his prose seems relatively transparent.

In some ways he focus. He does focus on a woman who, in the classic Victorian novel, you know, she has a baby out of wedlock, she doesn't die.

But everything goes badly wrong for her. Has an alcoholic husband classic realist, slump in decline?

Um, but I find it really interesting that he describes her face.

Oh, he also makes her illiterate. It's very important as that doesn't get to read in this novel, he says.

Her face was a blunt outline, and the grey eyes reflected all the natural prose of the Saxon.

Is this some sort of untouched? She hasn't been, um.

This is what I was talking about, about George Eliot. The raw material of moral sentiment.

That's what she thinks realist novelists should do. Look at raw material.

Okay, I'm going to finish with a little bit of Dickens.

Another example of a writer. I think he really complicates what we mean.

A case study for right writer who complicates what realism is and shows how very complicated these ideas are.

This is an illustration from a story called The Bloomsbury Christening.

And it's partly a story about how things are christening us when something conventionally changes its entity because of naming.

In a christening, you name a baby, and they become different because they get the name.

So they're different, and they also become part of the church of whatever they've been christened into.

So they've changed substance in some way. They've become a Christian.

And, um, and so it's a story about partly about how things change their identity.

So if you can say, well, what is real? Well, it depends depends what you call it, really.

Um, it's called the Bloomsbury christening.

And that's the first joke, because if you start to read the story, this story takes place on the Tottenham Court Road.

Um, Bloomsbury. If you know London now and then, Bloomsbury is much posher than the Tottenham Court Road.

And so calling it the Bloomsbury christening. It's almost as if the power of text has and affected this story into a higher class.

It's a classic Dickens story. The christening goes wrong. Um, but in some ways it's also a story about the difficult.

That prose is not natural.

The prose is steeped in representation, and so the idea that we cannot really pin down empirical reality because he keeps on playing.

Oh, sorry. I did turn these things off, but they obviously haven't turned off.

You will now know that I have a notification telling me to tell my children to use the bathroom.

Um, we have one small bathroom. Many people.

Um. In history.

Will this go down as the weirdest lecture you've ever attended? Probably. Uh.

Uh, okay. Well, let me, um. Well, I was trying to explain what's happening in a story you probably haven't read.

Uh, I was talking about the, uh.

The question of empirical reality. This is classic Dickens caps with the bout with the fair as carefully boxed up behind two

glazed calico calico curtains as any mysterious picture in any one of Mrs. Ratcliffe's castles.

So the caps. The camps seem like work of art.

The horses are like steam engines, which somehow.

Then next time you see a steam engine, you might think it's like a horse.

Um, and then. And then everything is seen to be like something else.

And some of these things are seen to be like something else out of an artistic creation,

which just shows that what is obviously Dickenss story is not real.

And I promised you I wasn't going to blow around these words because we've said we're saying these things is problematic.

But obviously Dickens a story is a fiction,

but the things in that fiction which are meant to be level one of real in the fiction, have become like another fiction.

This is my favourite bit. So this is further on in the story.

Did you ever said a little coquette with a large bustle who looked like a French lithograph?

What I love about this is he's saying that, um, so the narrator is saying that the coquette look like a French lithograph.

There's probably an assumption that maybe she herself has looked at a French lithograph and decided that that's what she wants to look like.

But the third thing, and this might be an interesting word to look out for, is the word look.

Yeah, she looked like as in she appeared to be.

She she that's what she appears like. She the way you look at her and you think, oh, she's quite similar to a French lithograph.

Also look. And then she perceives like a French lithograph.

You might think I'm over reading that there, but this comes through again later, so.

If you look back at this picture, this is the questioning itself.

There's the dad, the mum, the baby and the reluctant godfather who's been made a godfather because they hope [INAUDIBLE].

He's got no children. They hope [INAUDIBLE] leave money to the child. The baby.

Um, the resolution of this illustration is not great, but you you might notice that the father eyes, um, one of them is slightly turned in.

And then, if you look carefully, his portrait of his father, the portrait on the wall, the eyes also slightly turned in.

And if you look very closely, the baby too. Um, I'll come back to that.

But, um. This is, uh, the description of the father.

He looks like a faded giant with the head and face partially restored,

and he had a cast in his eye, which rendered it quite impossible for anyone to know.

Anyone with whom he converse, to know where he was looking.

This whole kind of. In some ways, Dickens is, uh, having fun with language and also having a go at kind of mocking anyone whose eyes aren't straight.

Um, but you can see that he looked like if both he appeared like.

And actually he's discussing perception as well as appearance.

It's a really interesting pun, the proximity of appearance and perception.

And it suggests how we how someone is judged and perceived by others look like bears and how they themselves perceive.

We will never know how someone else looks.

In both ways. I have a soft spot for this story because, um, my son, Chief Hugger of the bathroom, um, was born with a, um, delayed vision.

And then when it appeared, um, quite a serious, um, astigmatism and squint, uh, he's inherited it from me.

The astigmatism and partial kind of squint.

And so he had to have a I remember when his eyes were operated on, they were like I said, but they're beautiful.

They way they are. Can we just say they're beautiful even though they're not straight?

And they explain that they had to be altered, not just cosmetically,

but because otherwise he would see the world wrongly and it might affect his brain development.

And then later on, when I went, the optician told me that for me, the whole world is always a bit longer and thinner than everybody else's world.

And I think that's quite interesting. Like, we will never know how someone else looks.

We will never know. I quite like my I think kind of everything to me must be slightly more horse like, slim and oblong.

I mean, obviously it doesn't make sense because if everything is like that, it must be.

Anyway, I can't quite figure out, but yeah, well, you never know how anyone else looks.

We never know how anyone else appears, and we never know how anyone else looks.

Here are some of the early illustrations where you can definitely see that the illustrator Cruickshank is is

is on on the the question of lining up everybody eyes in the family to be slightly and beautifully wonky.

Um. So.

Final take on realism. I hope I, um, encouraged you to do as much as possible with the word real.

I have some historical grounding in where the word realism came, or how it was flying around in the late 19th century.

Um. I hope I've highlighted the the question of reality may differ from person to person.

I in no way, at any point in this lecture, want to suggest that things don't really happen, but how we see them and what gets seen.

It's obviously up for grabs, and I think I want to press on the question of, um, emotional reality, what may be beyond words.

And I said, be careful of realistic.

I think certainly in literary critical writing, it should be one that's banished from one category because it is so subjective.

It is such a power move to say that's not realistic.

Um, there's uh, for example, um, you may have come across the the quotation from Margaret Atwood talking about The Handmaid's Tale.

She say, you may think this is dystopian. You may think this is gothic, but everything in this novel has really happened at some point in history.

Um, and simultaneously, um, this is, uh, a review of the bond woman.

Sorry. I put an s in bonds. Woman. It's there isn't an s, it's bond women's narrative.

Um, Hilary Mantel, great late novelist, is talking about the bond woman's narrative.

And she said it's in some ways a Gothic novel, but rather like something like The Handmaid's Tale.

Actually, the Gothic could be seen as a realist China, she says.

The Gothic is an apt form in which to express the feelings of the powerless.

It is apt where the workings of cause and effect of veiled as they are from the slaves.

The Gothic Convention can survive and diversify because of its emotional and situational traits.

It is always vastly exaggerated, and at the same time there is always some culture, some spot on the map where it is, where it is all literally true.

And I think she's touching on a a sad, real truth that there are worlds then,

and there are worlds now where what is happening is, we might say, unbelievable.

Thank you very much.

