[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
Good morning. I can see I can hear that the mic is working.

Okay. So, uh. Welcome, everybody.

We're going to make a start because there's a lot of stuff to go through. Can you hear me?

Okay. Too loud, too not loud enough. Uh. Kind of.

All right, all right. Okay. Thank you. So, um, welcome to the second lecture of the circus on Victorian forms and ideas.

My name is Stefan Evangelista. I teach English at Trinity College, and I specialise in the late Victorian period.

So it's my pleasure to be able to introduce you today to some of the ideas and literary forms and authors that,

uh, dominate, uh, the last decades of the 19th century.

So, uh, in, in this lecture, I want to do mainly two things.

So the first one is to, as I say, introduce you to the concepts of aestheticism and decadence.

What do they mean? How did they come about? What kind of literary forms are they associated with?

What kind of authors kind of can be, uh, grouped under these umbrellas?

And how can we also question, in a way, these topics and, um, what critics of, uh, have tended to assume about these topics and,

uh, um, and then I hope also that there will be time for some questions, but we just have to see how we go.

Um, first of all, I should say that, um, uh, we tend to refer to the, uh, very last few years of the, um, 19th century as the fantasy.

Actually, I don't know if you've heard already had this this expression that simply means end of the century in French.

This is something that became popular at the time. People already in the 1890s were thinking of themselves as Fundacio.

And with this idea of fun, etc. I think first of all, with the French kind of, um, wording is telling.

It's a very cosmopolitan period. It's a period, especially in which the relationship between English and French literature becomes very close.

And some of the authors in England kind of imitate French forms.

Go to live in France. Oscar Wilde, this is a case in point. We'll talk about it in a moment.

Um, um, and sometimes people even speak about the long, fun,

basically meaning the beginning of the 20th century kind of is folded into this period as well.

So what's exciting about this period and the concept of the fantasy is precisely the fact that it's a little bit amorphous,

like it's not really 19th century, it's not really 20th century.

It's a little bit of both. It's a period of transition. People often say, we might also want to question what the concept of transition means is,

as though, you know, we're moving forward to something that we kind of culminate in modernism.

Modernism will be it. Whereas if I'm very accurate, it's like, oh, you're almost getting to modernism.

We may want to think by that question whether that's the that's the best way of thinking about it.

But, you know, for the moment, I think it's kind of fruitful to keep thinking of these authors.

And these questions are very much like, you know, kind of within the 19th century, but also, um, kind of looking forward to to the 20th century.

So in the first slide, let me just get rid of this.

Here I've put. And what a schematic.

Um, kind of a, uh, map, uh, to, um, uh, help us, uh, relate, uh, the earlier part of the century,

what is kind of more commonly, I would say, in a way associated with Victorian literature with the latter part of the century.

So the kind of things that we're talking about today.

So the first kind of overarching idea here is that the end of the final decades of the of the century, so 1880s,

1890s especially, are seen very much as a period of revolt against what was going on in the earlier century.

So it's almost like, you know, kind of big Victorian ideas are kind of criticised,

deconstructed, turned upside down, sometimes in very provocative ways.

So the first binary that I've put up there is realism versus the supernatural or the unconscious dream states, etc., etc.

So we know about realism.

That's probably a concept that you've already been introduced with, uh, very strongly associated with the mid Victorian decades.

So writers like George Eliot, Dickens, Gaskell, um, etc. realism is, um, is this type of a kind of urban writing or, or world view?

You could almost say that believes in the need to represent reality as closely as possible in literature.

The business of literature is to offer almost like a mirror of reality.

And that mirror image is something, for example, that George Eliot uses in, in her own, um, in her own writings.

Um, in the, um, in the fantasy, uh,

writers are interested in questioning the very idea of realism and thinking their literature business is not to offer a mirror of reality,

but almost to probe beyond reality. Right? A reality beyond the visible.

That is what they want to get. And that's why, uh, for example, the genre of the supernatural explores is a big boom of, say, ghost stories.

Supernatural stories. Think, for example, of Henry James's ghost stories.

Think of, uh, of, uh, Stevenson, Doctor Jekyll and Mr. Hyde, uh, you know, um, uh uh, think of,

um, of, uh, Sherlock Holmes Sherlock Holmes series that becomes very popular in this period.

The unconscious. That's an enormously, uh, kind of loaded cultural concept.

It's a word that doesn't even exist in the mid-century.

It has become very popular in the early 20th century with Freudian psychoanalysis.

So the very idea that, you know, that there's something kind of beyond what we can know rationally, right.

And that that something is interesting is the business of literature. That's what you have to get to.

So the plunge towards the supernatural, towards the unconscious, towards the dream.

Like we'll come back to that in the course of the lecture. So not reality as experienced in the day almost, but during the night.

Right. You know, so that when, when your senses kind of are shutting to themselves, like, you know,

when you enter these different worlds, that's what you're interested in as a writer.

And of course, the antisocial impulse.

So realism, um, and the big realist novels of the 19th century very often have a sense of social commitment, uh, social diagnosis.

So they want to kind of tell you about society, but the kind of message that underlies a lot of Dickens, a lot of Eliot's and the Gaskell's, etc.,

etc. is that in is that there needs to be more social cohesion, rational kind of that,

that society is networked and that the novel somehow helps us to see those connections that we might not be aware of.

Uh, otherwise. Um, in the late Victorian period, there's a big kind of reaction against this type of thinking.

And very often writers are interested precisely in antisocial impulses.

So criminality, for example, abnormality, madness, all these things kind of come under the spotlight, right?

Um, the next to, um, kind of pair.

Uh, and, you know, one wrote down novels versus short story essay and prose poem is very, um, strictly linked to what I've been talking about so far.

Because as we know, the genre, um, of realism is the genre of the novel, right?

You know, kind of an almost, uh, mid-Victorian genre that flourishes in the 60s, 5060s, 70s, the three volume novel.

So the kind of the long Victorian novels like a serialised. So the long form that allow that allows writers to develop this kind of, um,

kind of big panorama on society and kind of to take on these ambitious themes while in the fun, basically.

Again, there's a reaction to that and what writers, um, kind of tend to focus on or experiment with are short forms.

So this is really very much the period of the short story writer anticipated where the short story becomes incredibly popular,

something that will kind of, um, also go on right into the, into the earlier 20th century.

The essay. So the essay not as a functional, uh, you could say genre, but as something artful.

So writers that experiment with the essay style and form talk about that in a moment.

The prose poem I could have listed more. The first poem is another very.

Um, uh, very strongly late-Victorian genre, something also that comes from the close contact with French literature.

So the problem is, is, uh, is it hybrid? Uh, right between prose and poetry.

So it's a it's a, it's a, it's a piece of prose that wants to be, um, lyrical.

Right. That kind of whose, uh, was purpose is not description, but kind of playing with language, playing with form, just like poetry does.

Um, yeah. And the other thing that maybe it's worth saying about this is that while, um,

with the novel, with realism, we are in the world of kind of bestsellers, right?

And authors like Dickens were incredibly popular at the time.

They managed to do that thing of kind of both being kind of intellectual authors, but also popular authors.

In the late Victorian decades, that whole kind of contract between society and the authors kind of breaks a little bit,

breaks down a little bit, and so that you get into a world where, you know,

the authors that we now think as crucial to that period were authors that sold very little, write authors that,

you know, were speaking to elite publishers often that were kind of much more experimental.

Right. And just like, um, would be the case in the early 20th century with modernism.

So the next, um, the next pairing is a little bit more philosophical, right?

You know, if positivism is the philosophy that dominates the mid-century,

the Victorian period, the fantasy is really a period of philosophical pessimism.

So positivism means the belief in progress, right?

You know, uh, uh, the belief that that technology, science, etc. are going to make things better, better and better.

Um, pessimism. And also, it's a sound, scientific driven idea that you can have positive knowledge.

That is knowledge that is kind of based on evidence, right?

That that kind of scientific evidence based knowledge is, is the kind of prime form of knowledge in the fantasy.

You have an explosion of pessimistic, um, thought, uh, people that, uh, and, and philosophers of this period include Nietzsche,

Schopenhauer, so kind of famously kind of, uh, and kind of thinkers that think of kind of against the grain.

You could say I put pessimism, but I could also have put something like mysticism or spiritualism, etc.

Right. You know, as opposed, again, to a kind of emphasis on organised religion of the mid-Victorian period.

You towards the end of the century, you get an interest in the occult, in and in mystery, etc. linked, of course, to the supernatural.

And what I said before ethics, aesthetics. Uh, you know, I don't want to elaborate on because, you know,

we've basically been talking about it emphasis on social commitment, on kind of morality, etc.,

of the mid-century gets replaced in an interest by, uh, by an interest in form for writing or aesthetics,

um, rather than, um, that intended purpose, as it were, of literature.

And then the final binary, something I'm not going to be able to talk about today,

I don't think at great length at all is, you know, the Puritanism, you could say, of the mid-century, almost.

The stereotypical, uh, Victorian Puritanism is replaced by an interest in sex, sexuality.

Sexology is just a name, a kind of kind of a late 19th century term that means the science of sex,

or the medical understanding of sexuality that looks forward again to psychoanalysis.

Um, in the 20th century. Um, it's a period in which gender norms and the gender norms are questions, uh,

there's an interest in, in all sorts of non-standard types of sexuality, homosexuality.

I've put that because we've been talking about Oscar Wilde.

Uh, but, uh, you know, so there's a kind of great revolt against and against Victorian ways of,

of understanding and socialising in a way, um, sexuality.

Um, it is also the period in which you have this, um, phenomenon of the so-called new woman.

Like the new woman, I don't know, some of you might already have heard of that. Uh, it's a cultural figure that becomes kind of topical in the 1890s.

It just means that that we also witness, effectively a proto feminist movement.

Right? You know, kind of embraced by women also, but not only right, you know,

going to writings that are kind of explicitly written in protest against the narrowness, um, of the Victorian, um, social and gender forms.

Okay. And just before we get into the real thing, as it were, a word of caution also about the pairings.

You know, the pairings are good in kind of giving us a schematic idea of what goes on.

But of course, like every kind of a schematic formula and it's rigid, right.

You know, it's you know, you know, I said realism versus supernatural.

Well, the realism realism still keeps going on in the, in the, in the end of the century.

Right. Just like you have supernatural stories from the 1850s, 1860s, it's just the way that, you know, the balance of the, uh,

between this term seems to shift towards the end of the century,

but we must think of them as always operating somehow in a somewhat overlapping kind of way.

So. And business is, yes, to try and define the late Victorian period as it as it has it as a unique period.

I think I'm trying to think what's actually, uh, specific to, to, to this final decades of the century, but also not to kind of be to kind of,

um, and to Manichaean right, in kind of trying to, to, to, to, to separate, uh, different parts of the century too strongly from one another.

Okay, so, uh, the first author I want to talk about a little bit is Walter.

Peter. So, uh. Walter. Peter. Uh, um, I've chosen for two reasons.

Both. One is because he's actually, um, the in many ways, the figure, the kind of figurehead, the the father.

I think I've put down that it's the father of of aestheticism.

So the figure, uh, to whom we often think, uh, um, um,

when we want to kind of trying to find the origins of this movement, but also because he's actually an Oxford author.

Right. You know, uh,

and the whole phenomenon of aestheticism actually is something in which the city of Oxford in the university plays a very important role.

So, um, I just want to, um, uh, use Peter's first, um, uh, book, uh,

studies in the history of the Renaissance or the Renaissance, studies in Art and poetry.

You'll see the title is slightly different because he actually this is this is a picture of the second edition where he slightly changed the title,

uh, to try and work out, uh, together some of the characteristics of aestheticism.

So, um, and so, first of all, uh, think about, in a way, the strangeness of this book.

So this is actually an art historical book about, uh, the Italian and French Renaissance, which is divided into essays that focus on different,

um, artists like, you know, Leonardo, Michelangelo, Botticelli, whatever, you know, kind of one by one.

And it has a preface and the conclusion.

This book, however, became incredibly important in the late Victorian period in defining a completely new way of thinking about art.

So when we read it, okay, we're looking for its content.

What does it have to say about these actual painters? But we're also reading on a meta level, let's say,

which which kind of is the question that we are kind of trying to to understand is, what does it say about art?

What does it say about the relationship between life and art?

And that's exactly how his contemporary read this book and why it became, as I say, so influential.

Um, the, um, key idea, I suppose, of the Renaissance, if we have to boil it down,

is that Peter was trying to separate art from, uh, from ethical and moral constraints.

Right. So he was interested in thinking of art, uh, on the level of form, on the level of perception.

And we can already see, um, how he, um, kind of poses these questions, uh, from this first quotation,

which comes from the preface, uh, to the book, I'm going to read it out for you.

He writes to see the object as in itself it really is, has been justly said to be the aim of all true criticism whatsoever.

And in aesthetic criticism, the first step towards seeing one's object as it really is,

is to know one's own impression as it really is, to discriminate it, to realise it distinctly.

The objects with which aesthetic criticism deals music, poetry,

artistic and accomplished forms of human life are indeed receptacles of so many powers of forces.

They possess, like the products of nature, so many virtues or qualities.

What is this song or picture? This engaging personality presented in life or in a book to me, what effect does it really produce on me?

Does it give me pleasure? And if so, what sort or degree of pleasure?

How is my nature modified by its presence and under its influence?

So this is very much the kind of gist of Peter's method, right?

Which as you see here, equals aesthetic criticism. So you can see him working with that vocabulary of aesthetics.

Aesthetics means things that can be perceived through the senses, right.

You know, etymology so, so kind of sensual perception, sensual perception, um, becomes key to the understanding of, of art and literature, of course.

So sensual perception as opposed to what?

As opposed to obviously the mind right now struggling in abstract perception and embodied and embodied understanding of art, uh,

is what Peter talks about and the, um, the, um,

words or phrases I've highlighted that are the ones that I think are key to our understanding of what goes on.

So the first one is meat to me, right? You know, that idea of the individual impression right now, we're not talking about general theories of art.

Peter puts the spotlight on the perceiving subject, not so much on the work of art, but on the person who kind of interacts with it.

Right? And so that person becomes, in a way, the centre of Peter's system of criticism, of aesthetic criticism.

You can say that instead of the objective aim of 19th century criticism, to see the object as it really is, right.

You know, this, this scientific idea that the object by object, you know, the quotation that the quotation is actually from Matthew Arnold.

So from another kind of mid-Victorian thinker, by object they mean kind of a painting, say, or a sculpture or something like that, or even a book.

So the object of the critic is not to understand what it is in itself, but what it is for him or her for that.

Right. You know, for the critic. So and that's an enormous shift, right?

You know, no longer believing that the work of art has a meaning in itself.

But the meaning of the work of art is, you could say, a relationship, a relationship between the work of art and the person who perceives it,

who writes about what does it mean that there is this shift, as I say,

from from objectivity of the objects, you know, kind of the objectivity to subjectivity, right?

You know, to the subjective impression and the other enormous kind of important keyword in that, um, in this quotation is impression, right?

You know, impression is something that, um, very often is kind of demeaned in common speech,

you know, kind of my impression, meaning something that I'm not 100% sure of,

but is precisely that sense of uncertainty that these critics kind of celebrate, you know,

the idea of impression that the fleeting nature, you could say, of impressions.

So art and literature are nothing stable, therefore, forever, like the object right in the beginning of the of the of the of the quotation.

But they're linked to the, the passing nature of impression, the fact that that it's renewed all the time, but it doesn't stay for a long time.

The business of the critic is therefore to try and seize that impression, kind of understand what impression means.

Um, let's see what we have. Oh, yes. So in the next slide, I put what is probably the most famous, um, extract of the whole of, uh, of Peter's book.

And this, uh, is there because it gives us a good window into his method.

You know, what does he mean by impression? What does he mean by a type of criticism that is centred on the subject?

This is part of the essay on Leonardo da Vinci, author of, you know, kind of Renaissance painter and kind of scientist,

what have you, uh, author of this incredibly famous picture, one of the most famous pictures ever.

Uh, was already so in the 19th century. Probably not as much as it is now.

Uh, but the kind of view you can assume that readers would have kind of more or less known what the Mona Lisa look like.

And this is what how people Peter describes the Mona Lisa in the essay.

I hope that I should be big enough for you to read, but I'll read it anyway.

So he writes, the presents that Rousseau does so strangely beside the waters is expressive of what,

in the ways of a thousand years men had come to desire.

Hers is the head upon which all the ends of the world are come, and the eyelids are a little weary.

She is older than the rocks, amongst which sits like the vampire.

She has been dead many times, and learns the secrets of the grave, and has been a diver in deep seas,

and keeps their fallen day about her, and trafficked for strange webs with eastern merchants.

And this letter was the mother of Helen of Troy and the saint, um, the mother of Mary, and all this has been to her.

But as the sound of glass and flutes and leaves only in the delicacy with which it has moulded the changing lineaments,

and tinged the eyelids and the hands. The fantasy of a perpetual life sweeping together in one 10,000 experiences is an old one.

And modern philosophy has conceived the idea of humanity as wrought upon by and summing up in itself all modes of thought and life.

Certainly, certainly Lady Lisa might stand as the embodiment of the old fancy, the symbol of the modern idiom.

Okay, so I think this gives us a good example of how Peter in his writing,

is not trying to give us an objective representation of what he sees as a critic,

for instance, here, but rather, um, a representation, you could say, of his impression.

I think it would be fair to say that if you've never seen this painting and you read Pace's description,

you get very little sense of what it actually looks like.

And that's because Peter, as I say, has a style that is not a realistic style.

It's not a style that tries to hold a mirror to to the to the painting in this case,

but tries to hold the mirror to his own impression, to what he thinks about how he feels about it.

Right? So the style is not representational.

It's to do with that sense of interiority, that sense of the uniqueness of the impression.

So some of the things that you read here are undoubtedly a little bit farfetched.

For example, when he describes her as the vampire, right, you know, has known the secrets of the grave.

What does it mean? What does it mean to associate this, you know, slightly outlandish,

suddenly a little bit of extreme feelings and descriptions to to an image like this.

What he's doing is not giving you the truth in a way about this image,

but it's kind of unpacking possibilities that are kind of attached to to this painting.

Right? You know, in a way, uh, you can totally see why Peter would be criticised,

and he certainly was by his contemporaries for being fanciful, for being kind of misleading as a critique.

But that's the very essence of, of of his methods.

Right. You know, to try and, and individualise criticism to not to give a standard response to something, but to give you, as I say,

an individual some the responsibility is mediated through, you know, the very particular consciousness of, um, of the critic.

Um, the other thing to notice is his style, right?

You know, um, he's got a very unique, uh, style.

Um, long, elaborate sentences, uh, full of words that refer to the senses.

So hearing, smell, etc., etc. Um, and that's also an incredibly important part of his legacy.

People immediately, um, you know,

fell in love or hate it the way that Peter wrote and certainly kind of he was very widely imitated in, um, the late Victorian.

Yes. This is 1873. Um, by the way, the, the book and, uh, just as an example, very quickly, I've given you,

uh, W.B. Yeats is the, um, uh, first, uh, Oxford Book of Modern Verse, published in 1936.

So, Yeats, you'll know, major kind of, uh, turn of the century, uh, poet, um, as the first.

So that's the that's the actual book, uh, their first edition.

It's kind of it's been reprinted many, many times. He opened the book.

His first poem was actually his own setting of Peter's Mona Lisa.

So you can see this is Peter's. She's older than the vampire, among which sits the quotation that we see now,

Yeats kind of reconfigures in a way, into poetry and puts it at the opening of the book.

To me, that modern poetry started with Peter's, uh, description of the Mona Lisa.

That much importance, right? You know, he is given by Yeats.

Um, last, uh, slide, um, Peter is from the conclusion to the book.

So if you were to read one part of the Renaissance, you know, to get a good idea of what Peter and the athleticism are about.

I would recommend you read the conclusion. The conclusion was so incendiary.

Uh, it kind of kind of created a big uproar that Peter had to withdraw it from, uh, later editions of the book.

Um, I've given you, uh, he had just one, um, quotation.

And the reason is, uh, again, to kind of give you a sense of the this kind of rich kind of flavour, you could almost say, of Peter's prose.

So he writes to burn always with this hard, gem like flame, to maintain this ecstasies is success in life.

In a sense, we might even be said that that failure is to form habits.

For after all, habit is relative to a stereotyped world,

and meantime it is only the roughness of the eye that makes any two persons things situations seem alike.

While all melts under our feet, we may well grasp at any exquisite passion or any contribution to knowledge that seems by a lifted horizon,

to set the spirit free for a moment or any stirring of the senses.

Strange dyes, strange colours, I'm curious.

Odours or the work of of the artist hands or the face of one's friends.

Not to discriminate every moment, some passionate attitude in those about us and in the very brilliancy of their gifts,

some tragic dividing forces on their ways, is on these short days of frost, and some to sleep before sunset or evening.

Sorry, with this sense of the splendour of experience and of its awful brevity gathering all,

we are into one desperate effort to see and touch, we should hardly have time to make theories about the things we see and touch.

So you can see in terms of content, the kind of, uh, philosophy that Peter is, um,

kind of, um, uh, popularising or kind of expanding on is the kind of cop idiom idea.

Right? You know, the idea that, like, short, uh, things are going to finish very soon.

In any case, they kind of alter every second. So the best thing we can do is to seize the moment and live as fully as possible.

That's already very much in contrast with the type of ethical kind of with the kind of doctrines that a George Eliot, a Ruskin, etc. gives you,

which is about kind of, you know, uh, a kind of larger system, right, you know, long duration, etc. of course, it's also a very secular doctrine.

It's very much unlike what Christianity teaches.

Um, so this in kind of in philosophical terms, it says this is the important thing, um, that art is about.

Right. You know, it's about kind of teaching you to seize the moment, to create intensity for the moment.

And intensity is a big key word for aestheticism and for puppeteer and aestheticism in particular.

You know how to create intensity sometimes in what's called the gospel of intensity.

Right. And how do you intensify the moments in a world that's always fleeting?

Right. We talk about the fleeting ness before.

The other words that I've highlighted is this idea of strange dyes, strange colours, etc. if you remember also in the description of the Mona Lisa,

he immediately talked about the strangeness of the picture and see how telling it is of better aesthetic to be interested in the strange.

So it's not thinking about beauty in a traditional way, right? You know, he's kind of rather pursuing what is strange about this picture.

So, uh, it's not a traditional or a classical idea that he's interested in is precisely when that classical idea

becomes a little bit kind of it's kind of a little bit queried or kind of transformed into something else.

And strangeness or the addition of strangeness to beauty is the aesthetic category

that he's really kind of running after and wanting you to see as interesting.

There's a long tradition in the late 19th century of thinking about this kind of weird,

uh, syntheses of beauty and ugliness that stems most strongly from Baudelaire,

from the French poet Baudelaire, who kind of loved to write poems about, for example,

the, um, the strange combination of beauty and the attraction of death, for example.

And that's, that's the tradition that Plato is very much, uh, uh,

writing to the other English author of this time that's very interested in this idea,

this bloodletting idea of beauty and Antinous beauty and death, love and death, kind of all mixed up is Swinburne,

the poet, Swinburne, very close to Peter, uh, who was also writing, um, writing.

And at this time. Okay, let me see, because we need to, uh, move on.

Uh, I have another quote for. Okay, so so if you had to again remember, you know, a kind of few kind of key quotes from Peter that had yet to burn,

always with this hard gem like flame that's super famous, right?

You know, that's his kind of probably most famous quotation in the Renaissance.

I kind of, um, in that's kind of captures that sense of intensity that, that,

that, that talked to you about, but also that sense of strange, of kind of slight,

um, kind of, uh, symbolism and and mystery of the way that Peter writes, Peter doesn't want to explain everything to you as like it's almost his.

Been in the business of the critic is not to tell you everything, to make you understand everything,

but almost to deepen the mystery of what he's actually writing about.

Just like when he talks about the Mona Lisa as a vampire. What does he mean?

Like, you know, you read Peter, you don't understand the work of art that he's talking about, but you ask new questions about it.

That's the idea.

So with heart gem like flame, not 100% sure what it means, but, you know, kind of certainly a very strong symbol for what aestheticism is about.

And, uh, and this other quote, which I won't read is also from the conclusion.

The conclusion is only three full pages, by the way.

It's a very short piece of writing, and I just want to kind of, um, um, kind of, uh, um, mention the highlighted words here.

So this quick sense of light, quick and sense of life, meaning this kind of life that kind of becomes alive again.

Uh, so again, the idea of intensity, the idea of art kind of giving value pleasure to your moments.

Pleasure is an enormous category for Peter, something that's completely no, no,

otherwise, in Victorian art criticism, it's not about pleasure, it's about learning.

Right? It's about becoming a better person, not about developing pleasure.

So very provocative in a way, but by emphasising pleasure so much.

And then this is the very end of the book. He talks about the love of art for its own sake.

So that's the kind of the greatest thing that you get from art criticism is to love art for its own sake.

And this sentence, this word art, this word art for art's sake becomes very much the kind of motto you could almost say, of aestheticism.

So in kind of people talk about art for art, for art's sake a lot in, in the late Victorian period.

And again, it's something that very much divides, um, people.

So there are people who embrace the doctrine of art for art's sake,

and there are lots of people who criticise it as immoral and completely wrong art for art's sake.

So what does it mean? It means, again, that we kind of we engage with art and literature as well.

Uh, not to improve, not to learn, but because we want to get that sense of enjoyment.

Right, you know, and and so the meaning of art is not in a deep meaning.

It's not in its content. Let's say it's in its form, right?

It's in the States in its form. And so aestheticism is often thought of as a also a very formalist approach to,

to art writing or something of that kind of that puts a lot of emphasis on the surface rather than on the content.

Okay. From Peter, we move on to the person who became the most famous exponent of asceticism.

He needs introductions. Oscar Wilde Oscar Wilde there are links with Peter, both biographical and textual.

Uh, Oscar Wilde came to study English. I'm sorry. You can study classics here in Oxford.

In 1874. The Renaissance was published in 1873.

And when Wilde arrived, here was the moment of the big uproar against this book.

Peter was a very shy and retiring man, the opposite of wine, who was always seeking publicity.

As you can see here, you will never catch Peter being photographed in this outfit.

Um, Wilde in many ways, um, became the populariser of Victorian aestheticism, at least in the beginning of his career.

He seized on Peter's ideas, sometimes insist on Peter's very words.

There are bits of Peter's come scattered around the Oscar Wilde writings that he doesn't acknowledge explicitly.

He seized on these ideas and kind of managed to translate them for a bigger public.

So, um, what I've given you here is a series of caricatures, uh, some from the 1880s, some a little bit later,

that all feature kind of versions of Oscar Wilde as a kind of apostle of aestheticism.

So the one on the left hand side is by Max Beerbohm.

Beerbohm was a, um, an important satirist, uh, and indeed, um, kind of great kind of caricaturist of the 1890s, early 20th century.

Uh, those of you who are at Merton College, if there's anyone here, um, when then there's a whole room dedicated to Beerbohm in in in.

Merton was a great dandy. He kind of wore kind of very fancy clothing.

And I think they have this top hat as well. They're so kind of a whole one could do a whole different lecture on dress and fashion in different ways.

So that's a very important question anyway.

Oscar Wilde caricature on the left in the outfit that you've seen in the photograph and lecturing in America,

you can see that kind of photograph and photograph, the painting of, um, of the American president with the flags, uh, with a lily in his hand.

So the kind of classic kind of wild and posturing, um, because that's what he did.

Oscar Wilde, after he finished, um, here in Oxford in 1882,

he went on an American lecture tour where he basically preached the doctrine of aestheticism to, you know.

People in, uh, in kind of big public lectures in America.

Sometimes these lectures would draw as much as many people as a thousand members of the audience.

Right. And what I was doing in this lectures was effectively putting together bits of picture, maybe bits of John Ruskin and,

you know, kind of, uh, kind of telling the public across the Atlantic about this static movement,

um, Beerbohm caricatures that the sense in which,

while this appropriating almost seems out of this more like a sense of vanity, the sense of performance.

Uh, right hand side here, it's a caricature from punch punch, a great source of kind of satirical newspaper in the Victorian time.

Kind of very conservative, but kind of very funny at the same time.

So here is Oscar Wilde emerging out of a sunflower that, you know, uh, Wilde again, famous for kind of carrying sunflowers,

kind of popularising the idea of sunflower and connecting it to the aesthetics of aestheticism.

Uh, Wilde kind of emerging from the sunflower and the little, um, kind of, uh, satirical verse says at the end, aesthete of aesthetes.

What's in a name? The poet is Wilde, but his poetry stain.

This is when Wilde's first collection of poetry, uh, came out.

You know, it was kind of widely attacked by critics. It isn't very good poetry.

It is very derivative.

The idea was that while he'd already become famous in a way for being famous for popularising aestheticism when his writing started to appear,

people thought, this is not as good as as the whole thing seems to to promise.

Uh, and the last one, um, is, uh, is again a kind of staid figure who is gone to a restaurant.

And the idea is that he's not having a meal because it's just feeding on the beauty of those lilies,

which the waiter is, uh, setting at the centre of the table.

The 1880s in England are punctuated with satires of aestheticism.

What's important about this? The fact that aestheticism becomes a very, um, kind of popular movement, that, you know,

that it's not just something that's restricted to, you know, the kind of quarrels between Peter and Ruskin,

but it is something that is kind of, you know, becomes and something that, you know,

and it's a phenomenon that, you know, like a social phenomenon, uh, that people write about.

And it's very much constructed in the dialogue between these critics, like Peter and Wilde, who kind of propose or espouse aestheticism.

Seriously, seriously. And the critics who make fun of it.

Right. You know, so the cynicism is kind of born in the 1870s, in the 1880s, you have a vision of popularise aestheticism,

which is also kind of, you know, kind of the object of satire, etc. sometimes people talk about the aesthetic 80s.

Aesthetic 80s, right. Okay.

So, um, let's get on with a couple of quotes before we get to decadence.

Yeah. So, um. I said that wild, um, takes over, uh, picture and aestheticism.

Of course, he makes it his own. Um, in order to give you a flavour of that, I've got some quotations from the preface to The Picture of Dorian Grey.

Wines. Only novels. Very, very famous work. Of course, you'll all know about it.

Published in 1890, in periodical form, actually.

In 1891, uh, while published republished the book in book form, the novel in book form.

But he added a preface to to the to to the novel when it was published in book form,

in which he kind of wanted to kind of give it almost a map to readers for how to approach this work, you know, how do we read this novel correctly?

And the map very much kind of repeats or collects some of the ideas that, um, we already familiar with through Peter.

So, uh, just a few of these aphorisms kind of, kind of see how characteristic of Wilde's voice these aphorisms are.

The artist rights. Wilde is the creator of beautiful things. To reveal the art and conceal the artist is art's aim.

The critic is he who can translate into another manner or a new material,

his impression of beautiful things that that kind of an idiom of impression that we have here repeated by Wilde.

Uh, there is no such thing as a moral or any moral book.

Books are well written or badly written, that is all. Doesn't need any classic glossing.

No artist is ever more. The artist can express everything.

All art is at once surface and symbol. Those who beneath the surface do so at their own peril.

Those who read the symbols do so at their peril.

And then at the end, we can forgive a man for making a useful thing, as long as he does not admire it.

The only excuse for making a useless thing is that one admires it intensely.

All art is quite useless. Okay, so you can see, um, Peter's ideas kind of taken over by Wilde and given this slightly sensational flavour, right.

You know, and kind of. And also with the classic, uh, Wilde in wit.

Right. You know, that kind of weird tone that you don't know if he's being serious or not all the time.

Um, I talked about, uh, Wilde, um, as within the tradition of aestheticism, and that's absolutely true.

But why? It is useful?

Because he's one of those figures that kind of blurs, um, or kind of that exists in the blurry kind of zone between aestheticism and decadence.

And so for the last quarter of an hour of the lecture, I want to give you, um, some pointers about the idea of decadence, um, which, uh, you know,

is both very strongly in dialogue with aestheticism and the ideas I've been talking about so far, but also has its own distinctive characteristics.

So, for example, Dorian Grey itself as a novel is, yes, in this aestheticism tradition, you know, let me see here.

But it is also very much a decadent novel. Um, and I've given you a quote.

Uh, I'm not going to go into it, actually, uh, because it's too long,

but I've given you a quote which is from the part of the book, if you remember, where, um, Dorian is given, um, a book.

It's given a book by Lord Henry, a book that will corrupt him, that we teach him a kind of, um,

a kind of, uh, um, uh, eccentric or destructive morality that will plunging into that kind of,

um, cycle of selfishness, etc., that then results in the tragedy, uh, as in one of the book,

the idea that his own youth needs to be preserved, like, you know, against.

Think of that patron of preserving the moment. Right?

You know, kind of Dorian Grey's own, the character and investment in preserving the moment of his youth, etc.

What you get here is that, you know, all these material ideas are given just a slightly kind of perverse twist, you could almost say.

And that's one of the kind of first characteristics of decadence that we need to think about the idea of perversion.

So perversion, not so much in the kind of, you know, kind of standard or vulgar way that we understand it.

But to have an idea and to kind of twisted, perverted means to kind of to, to, to twisted, to kind of to, to turn it round.

Right. You know, the idea that, that the decadence is always something that reacts to something else.

Right? It's the end of something. You have something and then decadence turns it round, parodies, twists it, makes it perverse,

etc. so in Dorian Grey, you could say that the material aestheticism is made decadent.

It's turned, by the way, that that, while sorry, is interested in bringing out its kind of most dangerous, most risque, most decadent qualities.

So what I've given you here, just in the highlighted bits, uh, some of the most purple kind of overwritten bits of wild and again,

style of decadence is kind of classically full of overwriting or very strong metaphors.

So he talks about but has always looked to him like the works of some strange Egyptian beast that wrote in silver.

So kind of slightly kind of, um, overstated, you could say descriptions,

characterisations that go beyond the kind of realism is, is characterised by sobriety.

Right? You know, by a style that kind of matches, you know, the, the plain necessity, whatever its object,

decadent style is always kind of trying to add kind of extra layers of, of writing off kind of description of ornamentation to reality.

Uh, and when it talks about the book, yeah, the work in it, metaphors as monstrous as orchids and the subtle in colour.

Right. You know, that kind of, again, very rich flavour, almost too much like, you know, a metaphor,

like an orchid is the kind of thing that if I or you were to write it, somebody would say, this is a little bit kind of get rid of it.

But, you know, that's, that's what, that's what decadent writing kind of thrives on.

Uh, we'll skip with mons, uh, and we get to the yellow ninety's, um, slide in the yellow and separate that.

Uh, sorry. Oh, gosh. This is not, uh, particularly, uh, good, but you can, you can.

I think you can guess what this is about.

I put it there because, uh, while aestheticism is kind of, as I say, it's very often identified with the 1880s aesthetic 80s,

although kind of, you know, there's a popular aestheticism movement in the 80s.

Uh, decadence is kind of very strongly identified with the 1890s, a decade that is also referred to as the Yellow 90s.

I like this association with the colour yellow. That's also why I've chosen to do yellow slides, which I know are a little bit much after a while.

But that's because also I wanted to kind of be in dialogue with this periodical,

which is the kind of most famous, um, kind of English, um, decadent publication.

It's a periodical called The Yellow Book that is published only for a couple of years around 1894,

and then it collapses very quickly after the Oscar Wilde trial. So Oscar Wilde is tried and sent to jail in 1895.

The whole idea of decadence and aestheticism becomes really poisonous when Wilde goes to jail because,

you know, having been so strongly associated with this movement,

then, you know, once he's condemned, people very much can react very strongly, very publicly against it, against them.

And of course, the whole, um, kind of aestheticism, decadence phenomenon is associated with homosexuality retrospectively.

You know, even though, you know, Peter was a queer author, why these people knew about it.

Right? You know, at the time. But, you know, um, but the kind of condemnation is something that explodes very much late in the century.

Uh, given you these two both to show you, you know, how the editors here and the designers are playing with this colour?

Yellow. Yellow, the colour of decay of the leaves. Just like today.

When they turn from from green, they die, you know? Uh, yellow.

Not a colour that's used very often in fashion or in decoration, etc.,

etc. becomes all of a sudden very popular in the fantasy and kind of very much associated with this type of styling,

morbid modernity of, of the 1890s.

And what you have here is a cover cover of the first issue on the left hand side, and a kind of, um,

an advertising poster on the right hand side, both of them with this signature yellow, which is not a bright yellow.

It's a slightly mustardy kind of decaying type of yellow.

Um, and you can see from a very clearly already from the images that have ethos that this magazine and its idea of decadence are about.

On the left hand side, you see some kind of masked people, right?

You know, what are they doing? They seem to be having fun, etc. but, you know, there's something, again, kind of mysterious,

something very artful, kind of wilfully kind of mannered about what's going on here.

Not reality, but mask. Mask is another thing that white is super keen on, right?

You know, the idea of masks, masks that convey a truth that's superior to the truth of the face.

Right. And this is one of Wilde's paradoxes.

On the right hand side, you have an advertising poster, as I said, which features a woman who is reading at night.

It's a Night-Time scene. So really at night, through the books, outside of a bookshop and the kind of role you can see it.

I'm sorry, Berkeley, but this is kind of Pietro like figure of the bookseller is coming out again.

Very weird scene, you know, not not not not in business, in reality, but in kind of, you know, an idea of dangerous reading.

Like, you know, she start on her own, like at night, woman on her own at night.

You know, in the 19th century, it's not something that respectable women do, right?

Uh, both, by the way, feature a woman, a kind of woman.

Kind of, in a sense of pleasure, somehow autonomy and pleasure in both of these, of these images,

just to again and think about kind of gesture towards the new female public of the 1890s as an important reading public.

What I should say. Uh. Two things. The first thing is that Oscar Wilde never wrote for the Yellow Book.

So remember this thing, you know. So decadence is a world in which people kind of hated each other very strongly.

So the typical type of writers who gravitated around this magazines always excluded Oscar Wilde.

So when people associated this magazine with Oscar Wilde, they were completely wrong.

But that didn't matter. Uh, because in a way, you know, kind of the it was an already post-truth kind of society.

If decadence was kind of, uh, Oscar Wilde in this magazine, even though there's nothing to do with it, had to go down together with Wilde.

And the other thing I want to say is that both of these kind of covers or images were designed by Aubrey Beardsley.

Aubrey Beardsley, a big kind of, uh, an illustrator friend and then kind of enemy of Wilde, who was also a writer.

And the reason I want to mention Beardsley here is the name written on the slide

is because Beardsley also illustrated what is probably Wilde's most decadent,

uh, book, Salome in 1894. So. Right.

Wilde wrote this tragedy in French, French in 1891, and then, uh, Lord Alfred Douglas and Oscar Wilde together,

more or less translated this book and published it into English, published it in English and especially English, 1894.

And it came out in this incredibly ornate and beautiful illustrated edition,

um, illustrated by Aubrey Beardsley, who brings out the decadence of the book.

Right. And you can see this androgynous kind of devil like figures on the left and on the right hand side of the vineyard.

Illustration that captures the last moment of Salome. You will might know, but no one will remember that Salome is a biblical story.

Uh, in Wilde's tale, she falls in love with the prophet, with, uh, John the Baptist.

Uh, she's just a kind of pagan figure. John the Baptist is obviously a Christian figure.

And in in she because he will not consent to, um, to kind of, you know, being her kind of partner to having sex with her.

Um, she orders for his head to be, um, cut off for him to be beheaded and, um, in order to persuade her father, uh, who is a king to do that?

He or his stepfather, I should say he wants her to dance.

So there's a kind of kind of incestuous kind of part to this plot in which, you know,

a part of the play is taken up by the desire for this kind of of this older man, for his stepdaughter.

She enacts this dance, and then finally she gets what she wants,

the head of the prophet on a silver tray whiles on decadent addition to the story is that at the end she kisses the head right,

and she picks up the head and kisses the mouth of um of the decapitated head.

And this is what Beardsley captures here, like, you know, and with the blood dripping down from the head,

kind of into this, like out of which the flowers are screaming.

And that's a very nice image of decadence kind of feeding from the blood into beauty.

You know, that idea of kind of beauty and ugliness, of beauty and corruption that have been teasing out,

I think, are very, very strongly pictured by bye bye, Beardsley here.

Obviously, this is all stuff that most people thought was completely disgusting at the time.

Right. You have very heavily criticised things. Let's see.

Uh, um, as we go into the conclusion, I.

Yes, I think we've got time for this. Um, I just want to give a couple of definitions of decadence from the time also to give you pointers,

if you want to go and read up a little bit more, I think it's very useful to go and look at critics at the time and how they define decadence.

So this first one is by Arthur Simmons.

Arthur Simmons was a very important poet, I would say probably the most important part of the 1890s at the time.

But his reputation as really, really took a kind of nosedive in the 20th century,

both because he had a mental breakdown in the early 20th century and so kind of went out to the scene and started writing

lots of weird things and republishing his works a million times that plagiarise and doing lots of naughty kind of stuff.

And also because his poetry is very kind of somebody is very sexually kind of strong and quite misogynistic as well.

And that's also something that we have to be aware of, that decadence, you know, has misogynistic streaks.

Um, and that's and that's something that you can also see, for example, in the Salome myth, right after Simmons, uh, in 1893,

writes an essay called The Decadent Movement in Literature, which is very much the first big definition of decadence in the English language.

So, um, go and look it up if you're interested. And this is his definition after a fashion, the most representative literature of the days.

Not something is no doubt, he says, a decadence, hence the word decadence.

It has all the qualities that mark the end of great periods, the qualities that we find in the Greek, the Latin decadence,

an intense self-consciousness, a restless curiosity in research and over satirising refinement upon refinement, a spiritual and moral perversity.

If we call the class, if what we call the classic is indeed the supreme art, those qualities of perfect simplicity, perfect sanity.

Perfect proportion. The the supreme qualities then this representative literature of today interesting,

beautiful novel as it is, is really a new and beautiful and interesting disease.

I think this is a great definition because it's both positive and negative right at the same time.

Tries to capture what decadence is. And it says, on the one hand, it's the most interesting stuff that's been done today.

It's that it's the most representative literature of the day.

It's what's most modern is decadence is telling to people, but it has all these kind of problems to it.

Right. And so at the same time, he sets it in a perverse way. I think key word is interesting disease, an interesting disease.

Um, I'm going to skip, um, uh, Yeats, but if you're interested, uh, in definitions of decadence,

is Autumn of the body is another excellent essay to define decadence.

Autumn of the Body by Yeats. And I want to finish with this very short definition by Paul Bouchet,

a French critic who writes a style of decadence is one in which the unity of the book is

decomposed to give place to the independence of the page in which the page is decomposed,

to give place to the independence of the phrase and the phrase to give place to the independence of a word.

This is a quote I know that one is to ponder a little bit on in order to understand it, but what's interesting,

nothing good here is that, um, it's not a contextual or moralising definition of decadence, but one that is purely on style.

Right? I talked about this overwriting of decadence, that this exaggeration.

Bush tries to define the exaggeration and the way the decadence right by saying decadence,

are not worried about pages or sentences about individual words.

They're interested in the power of individual words.

And so that as a reader, you kind of you have to think very differently, no longer for the content,

no longer for all the things together, but just how individual words operate, almost like in a chaotic state.

As I say, something to ponder about, something to kind of, um, think further.

But it's in a world in which people and kind of and even the very people who invented the idea of decadence were always ready to moralise.

Bush stands out for drawing our attention to form.

I think this is all we have time for starting to kind of go through.

But there was a lot of material, and I thought it was important to kind of try and and and think of both movements.

Um, enjoy. And I hope you yeah, you get the chance to go into some of these works when you do the tutorial part in your collages.

Thank you very much. Hold on.

