[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
And that's because. Because we're going to try and make it interactive if we can, and have a bit of a dialogue as we go along.

So Matthew and I both work on topics relating to, um, multilingualism, translation in relation to literature,

of course. We both have a foot in the 19th century as well, so we thought it would be a good idea to,

um, open up a little bit the whole idea of Victorian literature and its, um,

being kind of exclusively in the English language by going through some examples of

how the Victorian writers, Victorian texts, actually engage with other languages,

but also how translation works in this period.

Because as soon as you've got an awareness of language difference and an awareness of translation or what I like to call translationality,

which is all the fluid ways of negotiating language difference that are just part of the way we use language the whole time.

As soon as you got an awareness of that, there's more than one voice on the page. So that instead of reading a book and saying,

oh, this is in English, it's telling me what it says. There are lots of other reasons why there's more than one voice on the page.

So we wanted to stage that by having two voices, two voices on the stage here.

Um, in the normal setup, there's lots that's great about the normal setup of doing a lecture,

but everything gets channelled into one person's voice, doesn't it? So you're given one voice to trust.

We wanted instead to give you two sometimes harmonising and sometimes, um, conflicting voices.

And what we want to get at is if you think about literary culture today,

if you think about the stuff you read, stuff you interact with, um, it's multilingual.

It's got lots of language difference in it.

If you think about who are the most influential writers circulating in English currently, who would you point to?

Ferrante? Knausgård?

Tokarczuk? These are all writers who circulate in translation by Ann Goldstein, by Jennifer Croft or Sebald translated by Anthea Bell.

If you think about what you interact with when I don't know the kind of different languages you

could encounter on Netflix or Rosalía's latest album last week in 13 different languages,

etc., it's obvious now that the arena of culture is a multilingual arena,

with translation being a fundamental part of that, an interaction with stuff that's culturally different and linguistically different,

just being a fundamental part of what culture is for all of us. Um, and it was the same in the Victorian period.

Media were different.

But the basic point, which is to say texts were circulating in translation, that was what people were reading, along with other stuff,

people were reading things in a load of different languages, um,

translation and encounter with language difference, which includes dialects as well as foreign languages,

that is something that's going on in literary text the whole time.

That's fundamentally part of Victorian literary culture and what it is to be in that culture.

And then the trouble with an institutional structure that tells you that you're studying something

called literature in English is that it tends to flatten out that linguistic and cultural diversity.

So all institutional structures have limitations,

and they have biases and a particular bias that we kind of want to kind of push against is the bias that says there is such a thing as English

and that's kind of unproblematic. And instead what we want to say is the texts you're reading in the 19th century are linguistically very varied.

Um, everyone, each of you, has a varied language repertoire.

Okay. So I love this word repertoire because it gets away from the idea that what we're all doing is speaking,

you know, we're operating within some system called English.

Um, and instead, you know, what? Have you come, you know, maybe, uh, you've learned languages.

Well, maybe you've travelled. Maybe there are different languages you use at home.

Maybe there are different kind of language behaviours that you engage in online.

Maybe you're nice and coding languages, etc. each one of us in the room has access to a different language repertoire,

brings language variety with them into this space. I.

One of the things we want to do in this lecture is to open up an awareness of what it is to read in the recognition of that.

So rather than saying, I'm reading these texts, they're in the same language and I speak that language.

Instead, say I'm reading these texts, each one of which has a different language repertoire,

and I'm bringing a different language repertoire to this encounter so that reading them

becomes a matter of negotiating this in this operating in this kind of varied language space.

All right. So we go for the first slide I think. I think it's got like a story I've got until I do this one.

Yeah. Okay. So um. Oh yeah. So so okay.

So first I'm just going to run through some examples and then, and then uh, and so yeah.

So here I want to just show you some stuff that's in the zone of Victorian literature that's not in English.

So here we're just kind of chipping away at this idea that the literature is literature in English.

Actually, literature in English is in dialogue with lots of other kinds of writing.

I like that I like to talk about literature being written with English rather than in English,

because I don't think language is a kind of bucket that you're in. I think it's something that you're working with.

Okay, so this is just a poem by Christina Rossetti. It's not in English, it's in Italian.

And I don't want to, you know, translate it. I don't want to engage in interpretation of it.

I just want to sort of show that to you. And so Rossetti wrote poems in Italian as well as in English.

She could have written all her poetry in Italian. Um, she chose not to.

She chose to write in English. But what the writing was happening in the writing in English, then, is a choice to write for a readership,

for a market with particular language materials from this more varied repertoire.

Um, so just to hold that in mind, and the other thing I want to point to is what print does,

because obviously a thing about print is that it erases accent.

So when you're interacting with like so, you know, we say this is in Italian,

but lots of it is understandable if you've never taken an Italian lesson.

You know, you don't need to have taken an Italian lesson to understand what Oriental means or understand what ADR means, for instance.

So one of the things about print is print enables is a medium that enables a kind of I think it's got two aspects to it.

So one is you can worry about it as a flattening of language difference,

or you can celebrate it as a medium that enables circulation across language difference.

So that's the other point I just wanted to make by showing you this slide.

Um, so the point of this is language variety in a writing life, so that when Rosetta chooses to write in English, she's writing with English,

but also silently with Italian and silently with a wider repertoire, channelling into what she's doing on the page.

Um, this is multilingualism as part of a text. So Charlotte Bronte, you know, um, a writer in English,

except there's quite a lot of French in everything she writes, and also a bit of a bit of German, as here.

Um, so this is an amazing scene. I don't know if you remember it from, uh, Jane Eyre.

And it's after the failed wedding ceremony and after she's been on that terrible carriage journey to the north,

and after she's been sleeping rough for a couple of days, and it's raining.

Um. And she ends up at the outside this house, the windows of this house, and she looks in.

And it's a kind of magical, magical moment.

Because even though there's a storm, the narrative makes her magically able to understand what's being said inside the room,

magically able to hear what's being said inside the room.

And she looks in and she sees two people reading a little little book and consulting a larger book for all the world.

I think it says, as though they were engaged in the act of translation. And what she hears is this, that terrible?

I can't do German very well at all, that I mean, I understand this down and knocked books.

That's because we're too close. Oh, yeah. Um, you know, um, and and then you get this and then you get this translation into English,

and then you get you get this section, and then you get the German again.

So I just want to think about what chucking this German onto the page is doing.

And again, I don't want to worry about what the translation is.

I don't want to make very many interpretive moves except to say so here at this moment where Jane is hitting a wall,

you know, she's encountering difference. She's being shown a space that she wants to go in but doesn't know whether she's allowed to enter.

We're given some German on the page. The German is not translated.

So immediately, this is kind of a divisive thing to do. And saying to readers, some of you understand this, some of you don't.

Who are you? Some of you understand it and know that it's a reference to Schiller.

Others of you don't. They're you just sort of saying the German.

Um, so what's being staged in the language here at this point is an encounter with difference.

And that's part of the drama of the encounter, a difference that there is happening in this moment, in the scene, in the novel.

So that's just a taster of multilingualism as part of, um, attacks.

Here's another instance. So this is from Browning. Um, it's from some of his late works.

Um, I mean, as you probably know,

the kind of amazing thing about Browning in his early and mid-career is that he'd imagine these speakers often in Italy,

you know, my last duchess say, and I thought, I say, here are characters who must historically be speaking in every language.

You know, the echo for our I can't be saying that's my last duchess.

He must have said something in Italian. He was initially. But the whole magic of Browning dramatic monologues is that that awareness is sort of, um.

It's like the myth of eye translation.

It's like the myth of ChatGPT and the kind of little thing you put in there, and you're magically able to understand what everyone else is saying.

Um, so, so one of the things that Browning is kind of experimenting with through much of

his career is this sort of magic of impossibly being able to understand someone,

um, in a different culture, um, using different language materials.

But then later on in his career, broadly, broadly, starting during the 1860s, withering in the book.

He gets very interested in the complications. I mean, I think he has been interested all along.

He's just been doing a different thing with them.

But he gets very interested in the in the complications of the linguistic textures that he's working with.

So translation becomes, um, what's possible in translation becomes very much part of his creative practice.

So as we'll see a bit later on,

the ring in the book is a is a is really importantly a work of trying to translate texts from Latin and text from Italian.

And this is a later text from the same phase. So this is working with Greek.

What you've got here is Aristophanes speaking so very much like in the earlier dramatic monologues.

Um, but Aristophanes is speaking this kind of mixture of Greek and English.

So you get this play here. Finale on for the mouth split red fig wise club that you need on for the.

Black hair in Italian, Fabian for the darling Ines.

And these are all words being brought into English and Greek and made to sort of say.

So you're made to wonder about, you know, what? What is it to try to hear Aristophanes speak?

What would it be like?

So it's a way of using this kind of madness of the language to think about how far you can really imagine your way into, or hear somebody speaking.

I know from a different use a different language. Right? Yeah.

I think that when you read out, you know,

the whole point is also to kind of bring you to that alien way of kind of relating words that you don't know what they mean.

That's true. Yeah, yeah. That's.

Yeah. Yeah, yeah. Here's another one.

So this is the beginning of another poem in English. Set the titles in French or whatever.

But again, it's that type of French that you don't need to have done any French lessons to be able to understand.

When I got here, I just want to show you these epigraphs from different texts in different languages.

And what's happening here is Cluff is setting up, is saying, okay, the poem set in Italy.

I'm always kind of means holiday romance, but it's it's so.

But what you're say. He's in a kind of European language space and he's on a signalling this at the beginning with these different epigraphs,

some different texts in different languages and saying what you can hear.

You know, be alert to language differences. It operates in this text.

Don't think of this text as just being written in a kind of, you know, within the confines of the Oxford English Dictionary, as it were.

And here we get a nice instance, just there are lots and lots of ways in which this is, uh, this is sort of performed and made expressive in the text.

And here's the beginning to say he's like, his friend could use this, but he's calling him Mustachio because he's initially right.

The you may write me an answer, or at the least put a skin on rapport with each other.

Or you can choose how kind of in what degree of French accent you want to read that out.

There's a kind of this. So that's a kind of unusual thing to say in that sentence.

Again, you don't need to learn French to understand what it means, but it's creating a disturbance in the line, isn't it?

And it's quite funny that the disturbance happens in the phrase that is about joining up and understanding one another with difficulty,

so that what he's doing and he's reaching for us, or instead of saying, put us in touch with one another, it's good to speak to you.

Well, you know, let's write to one another, he says, let's be all hyper.

And what that's doing is sort of bringing in an idea of kind of almost spiritual communion, I think, and at the same time ionising.

It is kind of making a kind of question mark about the degree to which people can be in contact.

Um, and it's doing that by bringing in this, this sort of slightly surprising French, French phrase at that moment.

Yeah. Okay. So I'm going to take over and say a few more words about the novel,

because in many ways we think of the novel rightly as a quintessentially English form

of 19th century culture that's focussed on issues that are to do with England's,

um, social problems, etc. if you think of Eliot, if you think of, um, Gaskell, Dickens,

etc. but actually the novel also has lots of opportunity for playing with foreign languages,

for kind of creating the type of dialogues that Matthew was already talking about in relation to Jane Eyre.

So the first few examples, first couple of examples that I have are from a historical novel called Maris the Epicurean,

written in 1885 by Walter Pater.

So, Peter, you've probably already come across, um, um, uh, as one of the main figures of aestheticism and the Aesthetic movement.

Right. So kind of the writer of, uh, of essays on art, um, kind of very much a mediator of the of ideas of art for art's sake,

etc., which themselves came to England from France from the mid-19th century.

French poetry. In 1885, Peter writes this historical novel called Maris the Epicurean,

which is an incredibly complex piece of writing in which he also channels these ideas of aestheticism, art for art's sake, etc.

What I've given you here is the very beginning of the novel. And uh, um, so the novel is set in ancient Rome, uh,

at the time in which Christianity is still outlawed, but it's kind of slowly penetrating into society.

And it tells the story of this young man called Marius, who undergoes probably a conversion to Christianity.

It's not quite clear whether he undergoes it or not, but he dies a Christian martyr almost by accident.

And the whole novel is about kind of trying to to understand what transition from a culture to another actually means.

And this idea of transition is something that is also interesting to interested to map on a linguistic level.

And that given you the very beginning of the novel here, where, as you can see, he puts a quotation from to bullets.

So from, from, from a Latin, a Latin, um, uh, poet.

What he's doing there, uh, by kind of giving you that chunk of Latin on the very first page of the novel,

is plunging you in, in many ways, in this alien world.

So he uses this kind of language difference to create this atmosphere, this alien atmosphere.

He's not expecting you necessarily to read, to be able to understand what's written there.

And in a way, he's also creating, if you will, a hierarchy of readers.

Some readers will be able to understand what this means, although Latin is complicated even for people who know it.

Writing. So it's not like you read it. You understand it immediately.

You probably have to pause it, slow down, you know, kind of work a little bit, you know, in order to, to decode that.

At the same time, what is also doing without telling you, he is interspersing bits and pieces of translations from this same poem in his own prose.

So he's kind of creating this prose, which is a kind of hybrid of his own invention and bits and pieces of translation.

Why does he do that? Because he wants to, in a way, create a sense of authenticity.

It's almost like, you know,

he uses the the real words of a Latin poet in a kind of dialogue with his own in order to recreate a Latin atmosphere in an atmosphere that's

kind of different linguistic atmosphere that's different from one that's kind of purely mediated through the English that is actually invented.

So much so that many critics, so critics, is well known for long, tortuous sentences, which are themselves sometimes a little bit difficult to decode.

Lots of critics have even, um, thought that Peter is actually modelling.

His own syntax, often on Latin syntax, so that you can see it's kind of, you know,

almost kind of using a different skeleton to build his own English syntax so that his language becomes kind of,

you know, as Matthew was saying at the beginning, translational, inflected through translational structures, even when he's not actually translating.

And the next quote I've got here is from a little bit later in the novel, uh, what happens is that, um,

and so there are two main kind of main characters at the beginning of the novel, and one of them gives a book as a gift to, to someone else.

And the book that's, that's, that's been given as a gift is apologies is a golden ass,

which is an anthology of, uh, of myths, let's say somebody call it a already a novel,

an ancient novel, something that kind of resembles vaguely what we understand, um, uh, as a novel, as it were, in the modern period.

So you have this kind of effect of a beam of a novel, a real novel kind of written about,

you know, inside, um, um, a kind of fabricated, uh, fiction about antiquity.

But as you can see, you have here this is the this is the dedication.

Then one character's characterised to the other,

which again plunges in that kind of strange alien world like we've already seen with The Browning where this characters,

this, this kind of, this English novel kind of tries to imagine what it's like to be to to exist in another language,

to exist in Latin and what you have here in this kind of sense of transition,

ality of translation ality is also grafted onto the level of the imagery that he's using here, because Peter and I think have given you, um, um, yes.

Um, as shown by the purple writing on the handsome yellow wrapper.

So the handsome yellow wrapper is something that two people in the 1880s would have sounded incredibly contemporary,

because very often French novels came wrapped in yellow wrappers in 19th century England.

And of course, French novels were well known for being a little bit risque, you know,

for for talking about themes which were a little bit more kind of difficult to,

to talk about in, in England, such as kind of, uh, you know, it seems to do with sexuality etc.

And so what you have here is the sense that this antique novel kind of is, is itself kind of has the attributes of a risque modern novel.

So this kind of sense of kind of fusing, uh, the, the, the modern and the ancient through these, um, these translational strategies.

Uh, last example, I think, uh, from, uh, Marius a little bit later on.

So this is the story of Cupid and Psyche is actually taken from Apollo's, his work.

And Peter, uh, has the two characters read this book together, and he inserts in his own novel in extended translation from a place.

So he writes his own translation, which goes on for, you know, quite a while, something like 15 or 20 pages, so that the novel itself,

like the historical novel itself, becomes a hybrid work,

a work that's made up partly of invented episodes, etc., and partly of a chunk of translation.

So the question for us is like, how do we understand this translation?

And how do we understand? How do we understand translation?

Should I switch my novel? I was I was trying to, uh, you're interfering with, uh, the translation.

Okay. Yeah. Is mine own? Yes it is.

Mine is still on. Yeah. So how do we understand the translation in relation to the creative work?

Or is the translation part of the novel? Is it kind of, uh, inserting a different voice, etc.?

Uh, last example from a novel from this period comes from George Eliot, Daniel Deronda.

Uh, those of you who have read it will know that she really likes to insert this epigraphs at the beginning of the novel,

or other chapters which open up what she's doing to dialogues with different authors,

etc. the simple point I want to make here is that she also opens up,

opens them up and and through, uh, strategies of multilingualism, a trans lingual ism.

That is. Why does she leave this, these epigraphs in foreign languages?

Why does she not translate them right? You know, she's obviously inserting a layer of again, of difficulty, etc., of alienation.

She wants you to encounter a foreign language.

She wants you to do this kind of slowing down exercise that we talked about before in relation to Peter,

of trying to decode something that's written in another language,

and that's something that's also very important to how she understands the novel as this kind of,

you know, means and this kind of, uh, ambitious work.

That's, uh, that's, uh, that's kind of, uh, that that kind of creates kind of webs of kind of intertextual intercultural encounters.

Um, next, um, slide, I think is Matthew again with Toro.

Yeah. So, so we've been we've been talking about translation as part of literary writing.

Do you want to? Do you want to mute yours? Otherwise, do you want mute your-? Oh you're trying

I was trying to imagine it as, like a kind of tonal accompaniment.

Say, like a nice harpsichord or something, but.

Is that okay? Well, I'll just get to that. Um. So, uh.

Havana. No. I just say maybe we should just use.

It's better now. Okay, cool. Okay, cool. So now. Okay, so we talked about translation as part of literary creativity.

So that's been chipping away at the idea that, um, there's, there's literally writing that happens in a language.

And translation is a kind of separate translational. So it's a separate sort of technique.

Um, actually working with language difference in moving across language difference is fundamentally part of literary creativity.

That's kind of what we've been sharing so far. How does this change, though?

What does this how does this matter to text which are published as being translations?

So amongst all this kind of more fluid interaction with language difference, there are nevertheless also texts that are institutionalised.

Us saying I am a translation. Um, and here is one.

So this is called a sheaf gleaned in French Fields by Terry Dart, uh, published in 1876, in Calcutta by Nepal, is a location in Calcutta.

So, I mean, I guess you know who that is. So this is, um, a brilliant poet who died very young, in early 20s.

Uh, grew up in Calcutta. English really is her main writing language and probably one of her main speaking languages as well.

French was her other main writing language, language Bengali.

She spoke and wrote of this in but not not so much Sanskrit.

She also learned. So here's someone with a kind of plural, uh, plural, you know, very obviously kind of plural language repertoire.

Writing in English as part of a larger bit, like Cristina was actually writing in English as part of a kind of larger range of language possibilities.

And one of the main things, um, she, uh, so she so she writes, uh, she writes poems that count as maybe it was being over there.

She writes poems that count as sort of poems under her own name.

But this volume of translations which was published, you know, she did when she was kind of your age.

It was published probably when she was about 21. So it's translations of lots and lots and lots and lots of lots of poems from French.

So she, they travelled kind of very unusually. Um, for their time they'd been able to with her family.

She'd been able to travel and spend time in France, um, and then spend time in the UK, in London and in Cambridge and on the south coast.

Um, and as part of that, she did a lot of translating of contemporary French poets.

Here's the contents page. There are many, many more pages or like 5 or 6 pages of contents.

There's lots and lots and lots of poems. And one of the things I just want to show you with this contents pages.

Look at all these different writers, um, some of whom are familiar to us now.

So there's Baudelaire in there. There's Latin in there, I think. But there are lots of writers.

I've, you know, I don't know who they are. Like, um, even though I've no idea who that is.

So it gives you a sense of somebody interacting with a whole load of different,

uh, voices, uh, most of which are now sort of neglected by literary history.

Um, when you turn the page and actually start to see the translations.

Um, so, um, the first one gives you a French text and an English text side by side, and after that you just get English text.

Um, but look what's look what's going on. So this is and again, we've got one of these French words that you don't need to know French to understand.

So dirty cats, you don't need to done a French lesson to understand what that means.

Uh, so this is a poem about reflection, and it's a translation about reflection.

And translation is itself a process of reflection.

Um, it's about looking into your mind and, you know, things a complicated for a while.

But then after that, you look into your mind and find somebody else's face,

and you're looking onto the page, you're doing your writing and the somebody else's words in your writing.

So this is translation, but it's translation being staged as a process of as an imaginative process of thinking, of understanding,

because it's translation as part of an imaginative act, which is about a kind of translation,

about somebody else becoming part of one's own consciousness and model.

Um, what you can do now, what's fantastic, I mean, there's lots is problematic about AI, but what's fantastic about AI is that it gives you away now.

So like 20 years ago, it's quite hard to engage with.

You know, you needed to do quite a lot of scholarship to engage with the kinds of issues that Stefan and I talking about, really.

But now it's easy. Now you can take that. Take the French poem.

If you don't know French, take the French poem, put it into ChatGPT ask you to give you a word, a word for word translation of it.

Ask ChatGPT to give you translations of it into a couple of different styles.

Put it into Google Translate so you can, um, as a, as a comparison.

And then you get a sense, you get a sense of what's going on in the French poem, and then you can get a sense of what street is doing,

I mean, which where she sticks very close to it a lot of the time it just makes a few significant changes.

And then if you want to read what's happening, so many of the translations later on in the volume can be read in the same way,

which is translation is part of the imaginative work that she's engaged in.

Um, you've only got the English text, but you can give that to Charlie and say, find me the French original of those,

and then you can get GPT to give you a word for word translation in French original.

And again, you can see what that has been doing in this process that is inseparably creative and translational.

Here's another instance of what she does when she gets to the end.

Uh, so the concluding sonnet in which what she's suggesting you've got in the poem is a.

On a writing that has. It has memory inherent in it.

So she's written the poems, and she's asking her father to read the poems with the memory of what the French was that she's translating from,

because he's been reading some of the same poems.

And you can now, you know, now you can create that for yourselves with the help of, with the help of, you know,

so I think it's really interesting, like the really interesting possibilities of diving into these kinds of texts and exploring them now.

Um, another instance of a, uh, of a publication that was institutionalised as a translation when it was published.

So this is Rubaiyat of Omar Khayyam, the astronomer poet of Persia, translated into English verse.

And there's no name after that. Um, I think most of you now will think of Rubaiyat of Omar Khayyam as being a poem by Edward Fitzgerald.

But that's not what it was when it was published. A poem by Edward Fitzgerald which makes use of a Persian source text.

That's the way in which it's institutionalised in English literary culture.

But when it was published, it was published as Rubaiyat of Omaha, meaning by Omar Khayyam, you know, translated into English.

And that's that. So translation here is a mode of kind of erasing one's own identity and trying to trying to offer this text out to English readers.

And so Kyle is an 11th century figure, astronomer and poet, lived in what is now Iran, right in Persia.

The manuscripts of his work, a lot of them were in India. And actually the manuscript that Fitzgerald was working with was sent to him from Calcutta.

So whereas that sheaf gleaned in French fields was French poems being taken to Calcutta, published in English for English readers in Bengal.

Uh, this is a text that's made from a manuscript that went from Calcutta to, uh, to near Cambridge, where, where Fitzgerald lives.

But I'm interested in the fact that for Fitzgerald, the act of self erasure through translation was fundamentally part of what he was doing.

And that act of self erasure has itself been erased by the processes of canonisation

and literary history that require an authority figure to be stuck on that page.

And I require this then to figure now as part of English literature, a poem by Edward Fitzgerald,

working creatively with clients materials, which is not really what Fitzgerald thought of himself is doing.

Um, and then just the loss doing. Yeah.

Then then the last. Um. Yeah. This is just.

And so this is just a bit more about repertoire. Um, so, you know, there's no more English poet than Tennyson, is there?

But I had a, like this was a while ago. I had an amazing experience because much of Tennyson's library is preserved in a research centre in Lincoln.

And you. So you can walk in and see his library books around you. Uh, maybe.

Yeah, probably more than half of the books on the shelves are in English, but not much more than half.

Probably two thirds of the books on the shelves are in English, and the others are in a whole load of different languages.

And what happens? What you discover when you, you know, if you browse Tennyson letters is that just say, you know,

he did some Latin, didn't really go to school much, but he did it in Latin with his dad.

And then he was did a lot of self-teaching of languages.

So he and his wife Emily would sit up and they'd be doing their Italian, and they'd have their Dante open,

and they'd be trying to make their way through Dante with the help of Italian dictionaries, etc. So, so two things about this.

So one is there's a load of different language material around Tennyson that he was engaging with the whole time.

But the other thing is, we really need to bracket the idea that you have to be fluent in a foreign language to do anything with it,

because a fundamental part of his creativity was encountering and trying to make sense of,

and being stimulated by, and getting imaginative nourishment from kinds of language that he didn't easily understand,

and he was picking his way through. Later in life, he was trying to read China and trying to learn Hebrew.

Then he was picking his way through Italian in the 1840s. Um, his German wasn't very good.

But look, one of these texts is the Arabian Nights. Oh, yeah, the Arabian Nights.

Another. Maybe I'll say something about this, another really fundamental text to to, uh, to to Victorian culture.

But he's got, he's got the Arabian Nights language, but he's also got a translation of the Arabian Nights into German by Grimm,

which he's sort of thinking, oh, I wonder what that would look like in German.

So I don't want to give you here is a sense of actually language difference, but also none of us masters of language.

You know, I think a really key thing like, um, uh, like that phrase, being a native speaker of a language.

Obviously no one is a native speaker of a language like. Have you like, have you met a baby recently?

You know, people who are born, you know, don't know how to speak yet, and you become what is defined by nationalist ideology as a native speaker.

You become a native speaker through intensive training, you know, through intensive language learning,

having your spelling corrected in school, being told how to do this, how to do that, etc.

So language is a kind of technology that you learn and all of us know,

like there's there are great reaches of what's defined as English that I have no idea about how to use.

Um, and so, so none of us is a kind of master of any language.

And Tennyson really loved kind of activating that awareness of part of his creativity,

which is to say he loved encountering kinds of language that he didn't, um, that there were that there were puzzling to him.

Hey. Okay. Can you?

Yes. Now it's working. Right. So in this slide I just want to go through one slide with you now.

And it's to do with trying to historicist a little bit.

How. You know give a kind of a snapshot of a history of Victorian translation.

Because one of the um, the points that we are making is also that translation is not something that is kind of stable in time.

Right? And so throughout the Victorian period, which kind of obviously kind of covers, you know, about 70, 80 years,

the culture of translation changed enormously and the kind of things that were being translated and how they were being translated also changed a lot.

So one of the, um, important things to think about is how the media or the arrival of different media changes the culture of translation through time.

And in the 19th century. One of the stories is, of course, about the arrival of periodicals, or rather,

the enormous expansion of periodical culture, which itself kind of becomes a an agent, a medium of translation.

So a lot of Victorians would have encountered their translations not in book forms, as we tend to do nowadays, but through periodicals.

So they're a little bit more difficult for us to trace in a way,

because that's not the kind of thing that you can very easily search through a library catalogue or something like that.

But Victorian periodicals, some of you who've already kind of had a look at some of them, are incredibly miscellaneous things.

So people often say that, you know,

the Victorians encountered science as well as kind of the arts side by side on the same pages of the same periodical.

Well, that's also true of translations. You know, they're often there often, and they're in periodical forms.

So this is a kind of, uh, roughly kind of decade by decade, you know, the Victorian decade.

So for the 1840s, 1850s, I've put as an example George Eliot's translations of philosophy.

Important point because, again, uh, you know, as we've seen with some of the other authors,

um, translation and creative writings are not discrete practices.

So some of the main authors of this period are also translators.

And their practice of translation that's low engagement in foreign languages, etc.,

actually bleeds into what they do, in Eliot's case, heroin advocacy, you could say,

of German philosophy in the 1850s, which happens through translating these major,

major works, is also something that is reflected in the contents of a novel.

So you could say that the novels kind of take up some of the themes that she's already been working through translation,

and kind of treat them through a new medium.

In 1861, the, uh, work that I wanted to highlight to you, and I'm going to go back get back to that later on in the lecture if we have time,

is Dante Gabriel Rossetti's translation of the early Italian poets.

So Dante Gabriel Rossetti, we know as a major Victorian poet, but also as a major Victorian painter, you know, very much,

um, his name is connected with the, um, the, the invention, as he were, of the Pre-Raphaelite movement in the 1850s.

In the 60s. He publishes this book, which is a translation of the early title in poets means medieval poets.

That kind of predated Dante. Right. So these were poets that were not translated into English.

Um, um, before. And we've already seen that with Christina Rossetti, the way in which this family, who were a family of Italian refugees.

So think of that as well, or, you know, can think of the social dynamics here.

So this is not a privileged world.

It's a world that comes out of the fact that these people have to migrate away from their country because they had political trouble,

that they root themselves in England, and they find a world in which they can put that knowledge of Italian somehow into dialogue with what

people want to hear about which what what do people want to read in the mid 19th century in Britain?

So Rossetti becomes the discoverer, if you will, of these Italian primitives,

which are very much in dialogue in terms of taste with what people liked in terms of Pre-Raphaelite art.

You know that the idea of primitivism, of roughness, something that comes before,

you know, academic periods that fix rules, etc., and he mediates them that way.

1870s to 1890s as an example of the variety of um, of the Victorian culture of translation and of major authors,

um roles, uh, in in creating this variety of of of translation culture, put the example of William Morris.

William Morris again a poet, but also somebody who's very, um, kind of influential in the Victorian art world.

Uh, he's also somebody who gets interested in, in, in what we now called Old English.

And through that route, uh, goes and translates Icelandic sagas again.

Uh, you can see the same interest in kind of in primitivism, in origins.

You can see excavating the past through translation, um, 1879 to 1810, an incredibly influential, phenomenal phenomenon.

This editorial series edited by Max Müller. Max Muller was a linguist who taught here at the University of Oxford.

Uh, he did a lot of things. He was an expert of of Sanskrit. Uh, um, um, I'm amongst his many kind of fields of expertise.

Uh, he launched this editorial series, which was all about, uh, translating philosophical, uh, religious.

Spiritual texts that came from the East, that is, from Asia, broadly conceived.

Um, we've already seen that Asia is a particularly kind of fertile ground for intercultural exchange and translational exchanges in the 19th century.

Obviously, this is partly to do with the entanglement with the history of empire, etc.

So one of the things you might want to think about and interrogate when we look at enterprises like that is how,

you know, the history of empire intersects with the history of translation.

Um in the 1880s. This is an enormous explosion of Russian novels that come to England not via Russia directly, but through France.

So in France, uh, in people start translating, uh, Tolstoy and then Dostoyevsky,

and they become the most fashionable, um, literary, uh, phenomenon of the time.

What's interesting about that is that translation often works this way.

That is that it's not necessarily one language in one culture that speaks directly to another, but it's often mediated in triangulated forms.

Right? So in a way, when the Russian novels come to England, they come to England as much as a French,

as much as a French phenomenon, as a Russian phenomenon. And in fact, people like Matthew Arnold, for example, who write about Russian novels,

and Oscar Wilde, who write about Russian novels early on in the 1880s,

uh, are kind of reading them in French and kind of very much understanding them as part of French culture.

Uh, these fashion changes later in the century, after, you know, people get tired of the of, uh, of the new Russian novels.

People start becoming interested in Scandinavian literature, and there's an enormous influx of Scandinavian drama.

Obviously, Ibsen is the kind of towering figure here, Ibsen,

so familiar to English audiences in the 1890s that he is almost treated as a domestic author,

even though, of course, he is, um, very much consumed in translation and also in translations that scholars have then,

um, really discredited as being full of mistakes, etc. you know, again,

that kind of sense of how we must not think of translation as necessarily kind of holding a truth,

but as kind of a cultural phenomenon in which the whole discourse of accuracy is a very complex one.

So we're not really kind of trying to understand how accurate is a translation, right, but rather kind of to place it on a spectrum.

And, and, and, um, of the kind of proximity and distance, let's say, um, from, from the original.

And then finally in the 1890s, the other enormous, uh, trend was the one of consuming, uh, French symbolist and decadent, uh,

poetry in translation again, something that we might want to, uh, that I might be able to talk about a little bit, uh, um, more in detail later on.

But, uh, you know, you have the phenomenon of major English poets in this decades engaging with, uh, you know,

not only with French literature, but with French translating French, uh, decadent and symbolist literature and kind of, again,

into mixing it with their own original production, creating this kind of slightly blurry zone that puts the whole question of, uh,

you know, the source text and the translation or the original and copy, you know, kind of very fluid, uh, relationship sort of material.

Um, from this. Yeah.

I want to just do a theory bit now. Um.

Steph and I do this, but should we end with Michael Field because of the way.

Like I could do shots I've got. Yeah I've got it.

Yeah. So so um a lot.

A lot of what we've been saying raises theoretical raises and theory questions, and I just want to spend a little bit of time clarifying them.

And that's just so you can think about this stuff better,

but also actually the kind of thing I'm going to say connects to what you could be doing in paper one, for instance.

Um, and actually, let me also say, before I forget, I'm doing a kind of say, the idea in this lecture is that's kind of lots of interesting nuggets.

And actually, we had too much stuff because we were all going, we were both going, let's put this in this.

But listen, um, so next week I'm doing a, I'm doing a follow up lecture at 12, um, on Tuesday at 12 in this space.

So that's more for uh, I say here's something that you really need to know.

And if you're interested in following up any of these issues a bit more,

in a bit more of a sustained way through other bits of, uh, 19th century literature, I can I'll help you do that next week.

Um, but so one of the one of the like this is like a really serious question because we, we think of ourselves as doing literature in English.

What is English? What is a language? Well, the boundaries around a language.

Um, so here's a historian of the language.

He says there are a few generally accepted rules or criteria for deciding when two ways of speaking should be regarded as being the same language,

and when they should be seen as two separate ones. And you know this.

Or you can say this in kind of a history of English from, uh, from, uh, the, you know, the Norman Conquest,

the kind of merging and interaction between French and English as they had existed up to that point, etcetera.

Uh, when this guy, uh, Tori Johnson says there are a few accepted, generally accepted rules,

he's massively overstating the case because there are, in fact no such rules.

So we have this extraordinary scenario in which everyone uses what language.

I mean, I'm totally committed to the idea that there are no such things as languages.

And yet I use the word language all the whole time.

So we're in this on a strange situation in which we have this conceptual term which we need to use.

And it is very problematic because no one can define it. And if you just think about a this stuff,

you might know about the relationship between Hindi in order to do say it's basically the same, but the script is different.

If you think about the relation between, uh, Danish and Swedish,

if you think about all the different ways of using language that can be labelled English, that can be mutually incomprehensible.

Um, if you think of the mutual comprehensibility between, say, Spanish and Italian,

um, you know, especially if they're written down or substantial, etc., etc.

So since you start to think about it, what you say is a continuum of language difference that has been chopped up in different ways.

And once you remember the existence of dialects, uh, once you remember the existence of dialects for that,

you know, there's a kind of wrong way of thinking about dialects, which is to say, well, there's English.

And then within English there are the dialects of English.

But actually the better way of think about dialects is to say no, dialects are part of a continuum of variety.

So 19th century dialects in the northeast of England were very similar to ways of speaking in Scandinavia, for instance.

So what you see and you'll know more about Italian dialects than I do anyway.

The kind of range of Italian, once you see the range of dialects that are in English language,

the range of non standardised ways of speaking language becomes visible as a continuum of difference,

um, which then gets sliced up so bit, so that areas of that continuum get chosen for political and cultural reasons.

And then they get standardised. So they get standardised typically by states through education systems.

People decide to make dictionaries. And what a dictionary does is it says this word is an English word.

You know, philosophy is spelt with y. That's English, and philosophy is spelt with an I-e that's French.

So that belongs in a different, you know, different dictionary and a different set of printing conventions.

So it's the work of standardisation that constructs the idea of languages as being separate.

And then there's a simplistic conception of translation that you take a meaning out of one language that's

being constructed as separate and put it into another language that's being constructed as separate,

that relies on this construction of languages. But once you remember that no one is ever just using a language,

they're always using knowledge in a particular situation in a particular way, as part of a particular practice.

Then translation comes to seem much more, you know, the idea of the being automatic translation between systems.

It becomes clear that that relies on a very simplified conception of what language is.

So let me just take you through some pointers to help help with this. Um, so this is about the invention of the idea of, uh, language.

Um, and I'll say more about this next week, actually.

Um, but what, uh, this is pointing to, you know, a great and very, in fact, very self-aware, um, work of linguistic, um, cataloguing, really.

So a bit like the Oxford English Dictionary, which, as you know, is a kind of late 19th century going on into the 20th century.

And surprise, there was also an enormous English dialect dictionary.

Um, but there are also, really importantly, encounters with language and attempts to discipline language in a whole lot of,

um, in a lot of different colonial contexts, including in India.

So this is a sort of dictionary ization of the amazing language variety that there is in India.

Um, so you say, well, okay, we have to we're exerting imperial control over this space.

We therefore need to catalogue the languages. But what Grierson and his assistants find when they try to catalogue languages

is there's no reason for drawing a boundary line here rather than there.

So they encounter a great variety of language use and sort of struggle with the question of how to separate it into,

you know, bits of language that are then going to be put in a dictionary and have have correct spelling imposed on them, etc.

Um, the fact of writing down is really important in this process.

And intuitively you can see why that should be, because speaking, you do all sorts of stuff.

But then as soon as you're writing, there's the question is am I spelling it correctly, etc.

So there's a whole load of issues around correctness that have been cultural.

You know, they don't necessarily. There are lots of areas of writing historically and culturally where areas where

where questions of correctness don't bear in on them in the way that they do in our,

in our culture. Um, but the right sort of turning language into writing is a process of reduction.

So you lose voice series intonation, you lose interactivity, you lose embodiment.

Um, and then again, you know, and that plays out both ways.

There are good things about that and bad things about it, but it's something to think about.

Um, and then part of what goes along with the standardisation of languages and the,

uh, and the construction of grammar books, etc., is this organisation of difference?

Um, and there's this fantastic theorist, Samuel, about next week, Sacchi, who's talked about this.

So when you've got a standard language, there's the assumption that everyone in that language space is speaking the same language.

So you don't need to translate within that space. Everyone understands one another, Sacchi.

And obviously that erases difference that way of thinking about it.

And when you're in this picture, which is a nationalist picture of language,

all the difference is concentrated between one standard language and another standard language.

So the boundary between English and Japanese is where all differences um, and Sacchi says, we really need to resist this picture,

which is being thrust upon us by all sorts of educational institutions and cultural institutions,

and instead say that whenever we're using language, we're in a space of hetero lingual address, which is to say,

we always need to be alert to the language differences that we're encountering,

and we need to think about what we're doing in traversing those language differences.

And really, we're going to stop in a minute. Stefan is going to look at an instance and we'll stop in a minute.

But really, I just want to leave you with that awareness, which is to say you're encountering a text,

you're writing an essay about it, you're doing something translational in that process.

There's a particular kind of language there. You're moving from that to a particular kind of language, which is your own.

What's going on in that translational move? Um, and I'll skip these couple of slides.

Um, oh, yeah. And this is just, this is just this I mean,

this is actually quite an interesting text because how do you regulate what counts

as English when we've just seen that you can't decide what counts as English.

So that's the problem that um, that the Hamburg has and all institutions have this kind of problem.

So it's really it's good to think about bordering practices. Institutions have to impose borders even when they can't be justified in many ways.

But the main reason I want to give you this slide is just to say it's fine to write about all this stuff we've been talking about.

Okay, so, um, it's fine for a third of NASA or a third of your exam paper to be about what's defined as foreign.

I don't know, we're foreign. But anyway, a text which were not originally written in English, etc.

So all the stuff we've been investigating, it's fine for you to write about as part of your course.

Um, so that was really what I wanted to say with that. And now that it's nice.

Please see this? Yeah.

Okay. This works now. Okay, so this is the last example I think we're going to have time to go through.

And it speaks to some of the things that Matthew was talking about right now,

about the kind of the fuzzy boundary between one language and another about the process of translation being also process of,

of kind of of, of, of communication, you know, from one culture to the other.

This one also opens up the question of the past versus the present.

So this is a book called Long Ago that was published in the 1890s by Michael Field, Michael Field.

Some of you might already have encountered it's actually a poetic duo. It's two women who are writing under one male pseudonym.

And in this particular book, what they did is to present modern translations, as it were, of Sappho.

So Sappho, uh, is a name that you will know kind of very famous ancient Greek poet.

But what people might not realise about Sappho is that actually we have very, very few of her own poems.

Very few of the poems are actually come down to us, to be precise, in the 19th century.

We only had two complete poems by Sappho that had been preserved, and the rest of them are just fragments.

So in this fragments can be, you know, 2 or 3 lines long, or they can be just, you know, in some cases just 2 or 3 words long.

So how do we know that she's such a good poet? Well, we know it mostly because we have to trust her.

Early critics, so especially Latin critics who knew Sappho and who had access to the poetry before it was all destroyed, kind of either imitated her.

So some of this works actually exists in translation,

but not in the original or Indian translations that we don't quite know how close they are to the original.

So you see, this is a little problem of translation is linked to the idea of how texts survive.

So why are Michael Field attracted to Sappho?

Well, first of all, because Sappho is an author who was being rediscovered in the 19th century, rediscovered because,

you know, people were finding new fragments, especially in Egypt, through archaeological excavations.

They found new bits and pieces of papyrus on which, you know, which had preserved poems of Sappho.

In some cases, even within mummies, in the wrappings of mummies that were preserved,

you know, bits and pieces that scholars were kind of identifying as Sapphic fragments.

So rather than being a fixed author, she was somebody who's kind of changing a lot, let's say, in the course of the 19th century.

The other famous thing about Sappho is that, of course, she's linked to female homoeroticism and homosexuality,

etc., and some of her poems talk about either love triangles involving two women and a man, or love between women.

Michael Field, a two women who are in a poetic and sexual partnership with each other, writing under it male pseudonym.

They find in Sappho someone who can kind of help them,

kind of express things that are otherwise very difficult to articulate in print in the 19th century.

And this is what the poems look like inside the book. The book is actually very beautiful.

It's a it's a small object was printed only in 100 copies. So it's actually very rare.

And nowadays it's an incredibly expensive book. In Oxford we have 2 or 3 copies, and inside what they do is they pick a sapphic fragment.

So the first one, um, so and they open the poem with the Sapphic fragment, which they print in the original Greek.

Again, that's not so much because they expect you to be able to understand that word,

but is to enable you to encounter this weird world and kind of be almost fascinated by the austerity,

by the difference of, of the Greek alphabet, especially if you can't read it.

It's so happens that that that bit of Greek means. But they plaited garlands.

So this is a kind of classic example of a fragment that's very kind of short.

So that's what we have. And what Michael Field do is that they kind of improvise, as it were, on that fragment,

kind of weaving them into their own English text and, as they put it, extending the fragment into a full lyric.

Sorry. So that translation is very much an act of interpretation, but it's also very much a sense in that of imaginative engagement with,

with this fragment, a way of developing it into a full blown English poet poem.

And so I've given you an extract here from that brief preface to the book in which they say you did.

What they wanted to do is to do this this extension of Sappho's fragments into lyrics.

What's nice and neat about this is also that they're using actually quite a dry, scholarly book about Sappho as the kind of, you know,

as their main text as well, but their turn in the discourse of scholarship into something much more creative, much more individual, if you will.

It may be as a yeah. Final slide.

This is actually a slide from the book itself.

You can see that the Greek is actually written in red, and the Greek is written in red all the way, uh, through sort of book,

something that was kind of incredibly kind of costly, uh, to do from a kind of material point of view in the 19th century.

But again, they wanted to you to kind of encounter the Greek as a, as a kind of a precious object, almost.

And so this kind of issue of the materiality of language.

Right, you know, which is kind of very present in. A history of the fragments of the things that have got lost through time is

something that we might also want to think about when we think about translation,

and when we think about the presence of foreign languages in 19th century, 19th century texts.

And I think with this, we probably have run out of time. But do you want to say anything kind of to wrap up?

Not really. No, no, that's that's all. Yeah. So yeah.

So, uh, as Matthew said, we had so many more examples.

But, you know, I think, you know, I hope that we've given you enough to get kind of interested in translation and excited in

kind of creative ways of approaching multilingualism and translation in 19th century texts.

So thank you very much for listening to being here. Thanks. No.

