[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
Welcome back to week two of our lectures on the cultural and historical context for reading Old English literature.

It's lovely to see you all again. Um, quick reminder that the materials for the lecture will be available online, uh, hopefully later today.

Um, certainly within the week. Uh, this lecture will include reference to enslavement as well as ablest approaches to illness.

Um, we'll always think about these things as sort of curiosity and sensitivity.

Quick recap, uh, of what we covered in the last lecture.

If you couldn't make it. I believe you can still access this for about another week.

Not quite sure what the current regs all, but you should know. Uh, if you're not sure, talk to your college tutorial.

Contact the faculty. Um, and you can download the PowerPoints in the handout too.

Last week was concerned with the origins of what has historically been called Anglo-Saxon England,

and which I'll call early medieval England in general, for reasons that we discussed in that lecture the appropriation of the term Anglo

Saxon and the difficult political context for that terminology in the present moment.

We learnt that the pressures on the Roman Empire in the fourth century led to the withdrawal of imperial military power from Britain,

which in turn opened up the way for German tribes to migrate and settle among the native British Celts.

These native tribes with the angles, the Saxons and the Jutes, and it is their languages which came together as Old English,

the earliest form of the English language that we speak today, and that is speaking in wide parts of the world.

We learnt that the nature of Germanic migration and settlement is disputed.

Contemporary sources speak of a wide scale massacre of British Celts by Germanic settlers.

While the archaeological evidence suggests that the reality was more a process

of acculturation in which the British attuned to the practices of their new,

suddenly socially dominant Germanic settlers.

The angles, the Saxons and the Jutes were pagan, and we saw that Irish missionaries from the Norse and Roman missionaries from the south

together converted these Germanic kingdoms to Christianity by the late seventh century,

so the late six hundreds, and this had a lasting effect on Old English literature, which was capable, as we have seen,

and will continue to say, of celebrating both its Germanic legendary past and its effusively Christian presence.

We looked particularly, uh, we well, we started to look and we're going to look more at an object called the Franks Caskets,

which features images from biblical, Germanic and classical mythology.

And we also had a bit of a look at Beowulf, whose eponymous hero may well be destined for heaven.

We'll think about that shortly, despite himself having been a pagan.

Ultimately, we recognise that the early medieval English were not an insular, isolated people walled in by the sea around the British Isles.

On the contrary, they felt deep connections, both with their ancestral homelands in northern Europe and with Rome and the Middle East,

the very much present and historical centres of Christian power and Christian history.

And today we'll be picking up where we left off in the late seventh century.

We'll think about the aftermath of the conversion, particularly as it applies to powerful women who ruled over religious houses.

We're going to see something of how the early English divided themselves into kingdoms, who then vied with one another for supremacy.

All of these kingdoms efforts were overturned.

Spoilers by the calamity of the first Viking Age, a series of raids from Denmark and related areas which became whole scale invasion.

Our focus will be on a name famous enough that I imagine we've mostly heard of him,

King Alfred the Great and Alfred's lasting fame as a leader arises from his successes not only as a military leader pushing back these Danes,

these Danish forces and Vikings, and establishing the first nascent territories of what would eventually become England.

But he's also, um, his fame also arises from his prowess as an intellectual leader, a promoter of literate Christian culture.

As in our last lecture, we will encounter these historical events through texts, through objects, and through people.

And you can write about any of these texts in your essays and your exams, including the pros and the historical sources.

So I encourage you to think about how they are written, what interests you about them, and as you move through the year,

what connections they throw up with the other texts that you might be studying, particularly in your college class and tutorial settings.

Um, yeah, a little note. Oh, so this is actually from last year's premium Tom book.

So I'm gonna update this. Uh, I imagine it hasn't actually changed, but you should have the 2025 handbook available to you.

Just a little note on the slide. A reminder the old and Middle English are both phases of the English language.

And so you can write your whole exam paper on Old and or Middle English if you so choose.

And you must show competence in these languages when you write. This means directly quoting from those texts.

Please do not write um, exam papers where you only quote old or Middle English in translation.

Very much need to be using the original language for the exam.

You can also write up to a third of your exam papers, uh, on text not originally written in English, for example, in this particular period, Latin.

I'm not going to necessarily suggest that you write a whole third,

but the point is that you can bring material in other languages that has a bearing upon the development of English literature into your wider picture.

For the exams and those languages you absolutely can quote in translation.

You're here doing an English degree. No one expects you to be able to read and work with other languages, um, unless you wish to.

And I will look at a little Latin in this section, but we will always look at such things together in translation.

So please do have a careful read of the handbook coverage for this paper when you get a moment.

Okay, so. We're going to pick up where we left off last week.

We had heard that Roman missionaries came to the south of England in the year five,

nine, seven, a date that I would love to be seared on your memory like a brand.

Um, and they converted the whole islands in the space of approximately 90 years.

So by the late six hundreds, we are in a firmly Christian society.

And we heard an anecdote. We had a small extract from Bede's Historia Ecclesiastical,

with the metaphor of a sparrow flying across a warm, fire filled whole fire filled a hole heated by fire.

Experiencing the warmth of life before heading back out into the cold,

with the whole representing life itself and the cold outside, representing the unknown of what comes before and after.

And this metaphor is raised in the context of how Christianity, in the eyes of Bede and of the missionaries,

offered a better alternative to the existing pagan systems for thinking about what lies beyond this earthly life.

This idea of the whole is one of the common tropes of Old English literature.

For the kin group, it's the safe place where life is centred.

And so the hall becomes metonymy in Old English poetry for society as a whole, as well as for life itself.

So in Beowulf, when the Hall of Heralds comes under attack from Grendel,

it is symbolic of how the whole way of life that the Danes have stands to be lost.

So thinking a bit more real politic about the process of conversion, why would pagan kings convert to Christianity?

There are a host of possible reasons. In the case of King Albert of Kent.

So right down in the southeast, where a missionary, we've seen that his marriage into a Christian dynasty could play a role.

His wife was a Christian from France who. Christianity was a religion that had a lot to offer kings in terms of consolidating their power.

It was centred in Rome, which was both an exotic place to, um,

the early medieval English and an ancient centre of power that would bring them a certain cachet, a certain mystique.

Christianity also came packaged with notions of kingship laid down in the Bible,

namely that kingship was divinely ordained and that kings therefore had the support of God in being raised above all other people.

I don't here diminish the possibility and indeed the complete certainty of personal faith

being a massive motivating factor for kings and for people across the medieval period.

Um, but there were a lot of political selling points for the Roman missionaries that might help us

to account for that transitional phase from pagan kingdoms to the nascent Christian society.

Christian missionaries also brought with them literacy in the form of the Roman alphabet.

The ability to make books with parchment.

Through this technology and the knowledge that came with them, kings had great of recourse to establishing literate practices, law and personal power.

We learnt that the pagan Anglo-Saxons and Jesus did have their own writing system.

They used runes, and runes were carved onto stone, bone, wood.

Not particularly convenient for writing extremely long texts, not the foundations of book culture.

So the conversion of the English also heralds an enormous technological shift,

simply in the production of literature and the possibility for the dissemination of literature more widely.

Literacy does remain extremely limited throughout the early medieval periods.

You would learn to read and perhaps write if you were a professional religious person, such as a monk or a nun or cleric.

Or perhaps if you were an aristocrat, particularly in the later part of our period.

The vast majority of manuscripts were written in Christian séances by monks working in spaces called scriptorium.

A scriptorium is the singular, scriptorium is the plural,

and it is a place where writing happens and we have some extremely beautiful pieces of manuscript art produced in the period.

I've got an image of the Lindisfarne Gospels up here on the slide.

Following the conversion, there was a great flowering of Latin authors, including bees, whose history we've been looking to a bit.

Bede's would have been acutely conscious that his religious salvation and his

intellectual life was entirely down to this process of mission and conversion.

Now, last week we talked a bit about the story of Wayland the Smiths,

a Germanic legends that passed into early medieval English culture and continued to be used on various cultural objects.

We have an image of the Franks casket up here, but Wayland also figures as a character in Beowulf, uh, and appears in other verse as well.

And indeed, um is swapped in for some classical Roman figures in the translation of Prometheus constellation of philosophy.

So we thought a bit about processes of replacement, of acculturation.

Um, and we can think about this to help elucidate the effect of the Christian conversion on early medieval culture.

Traditional forms of art and literature were adapted for use in worship of a Christian god.

So what we often see as a hybridisation of Christian concerns and traditional Germanic modes of expression.

Let's have a look at this example. The Franks casket. So I only showed you half of the front panel of the Franks Casket in our last lecture.

Um, the real thing is can.

Okay. Um, no, it's none of this. Uh, the original.

Anybody. But you can go and look. Um, it is about the same.

Um, I'm going to talk about the casket now, if anyone wants to look at it afterwards.

This is a really nice replica. I will hang around in the atrium.

Okay. So. Here is the whole panel on the front of this box.

This box is made in the eighth century. Uh, it's made from whalebone.

So that's kind of interesting. We can think more about that. And we've got two stories on the front panel of this box.

Uh, one is a story of the story of whaling.

Dismissed. Drugging, poor batter held, and then escaping from his captivity, um, in her father's smithy.

And on the right is a story from the Bible. Okay.

So we've got three figures approaching kind of two melded figures together.

I don't have a thing to do with. No, I do not.

Well, what we have here is the story of the three major time in the Bible.

So this is somewhat after the Nativity. This is a period called epiphany.

This is when the three wise men arrive and give gifts to the infant Christ, who is here with his mother.

Why this picture of a vitally important biblical moment, the birth of the Christian Saviour,

is positioned next to the grisly story of a pagan legendary hero has been the subject,

as you can imagine, of much debate, we might notice various visual parallels across this panel.

Weyland is presenting Powder Hills with the drugged cup inside A, which is made from a skull, a dead man at his feet.

The Kings are presenting the infant Christ with gifts.

There was a moment, a movement from from your perspective, left to right, across this whole panel, in both images.

Christ is surrounded by the figure of his mother, Mary, in a manner evocative of pregnancy, the start of new life.

And we do know that biology becomes pregnant from her nonconsensual encounter with Weyland.

These images through. Oh, in fact, my favourite little thing. So, Weyland, uh, makes some wings for himself to escape, uh, with.

And he takes those from geese, I think. Um, but we can see over just on the other side of the three.

Wise man. One of the geese is, like, escaped into the. There's no goose in the biblical story, so I don't know.

Um, I think the cover was having some fun. And these images, through these connections, these basic similarities, they're placed in strong contrast.

I would suggest me feel free to disagree that Wayland represents the Germanic past, hugely important to the identity of the medieval English,

and clearly a source of both entertainment and pride,

but ultimately transient and weak when compared to the eternal omnipotence of the worship of Christ.

So perhaps a representation of that shift? Uh, not a sacrificing of the identity that people looking at this box might have had, uh,

an idea of their past, but a sense of the movement to the present that they're not living in.

Beowulf is a poem that has a complex relationship with Christianity.

You'll probably still come across articles that quite determinedly try and say that there's nothing Christian about stool,

which is sort of a difficult argument to make, because Christianity is woven for its fabric very tightly, but its central characters are all pagan,

and the poet shows them resorting to devil worship, um, to rid themselves of the threat of Grendel.

And this is the first passage, uh, on your hand out.

Which I will read to us a bit in translation, and then, sorry, a bit in Old English, then translation.

So, number one, will them hear you head on at Taraf and wig?

Well, some good words on. Bad on. That's him. Gast bona gaucho.

Your friend Mira with staled that I am swill was thou heard a horse in the door hit hello, human done in Maud.

Stefan met odd here. Nick. Who's on?

Sometimes they offered honour to idols at pagan shrines,

requested with prayers that the soul slayer would bring about a remedy for them in the people's affliction.

Such was their custom, the hope of heathens.

They remembered [INAUDIBLE] in their minds. They did not know the measure of the judge of deeds, nor did they know the Lord's God.

Nor indeed did they know how to pray to the protector of heaven's wielder of glory.

Woe unto him who must thrust his soul into the fires. Embrace through wicked force.

He expect no comfort, nor expect any change in fortune.

It will be good for him who after death day might seek the Lord and find security in the embrace of the father.

Might compare that loss lined out with the end of the Wanderer. When you get to it.

Now the Danes of this poem, it is being made amply clear, do not know God.

By contrast, in early medieval English audience listening to this poem would have been fully Christian, would have known how to pray.

So it's not just about knowledge of God, but the text is pinpointing the mechanisms of engaging with that faith.

They would have known the audience that their ancestors were pagan.

Those ancestors were drifting further and further into the past, but for the earliest audiences, it might have been within living memory.

Certainly might have been grandparents or great grandparents.

And they would have believed we at least had the possibility of believing that those ancestors were in [INAUDIBLE] because they were not converted,

they were not Christian. And Christ says in the Bible that no one will come to the father except by me.

The debated part of the Bible. There wasn't only one way to take a statement like that, but.

Some critics have asked whether the hero Beowulf might receive Christian salvation

at the end of the poem as a reward for his good life and good kingship. And this idea of the noble pagan is not remotely unique here.

Um, in fact, it's quite central to Dante's Inferno.

Is Beowulf solved? Saved? Um, we have some lines here from towards the end of the poem.

Um, hymn of choice, where you watch soul seconds souls faster.

Um. Yet from him his soul departed to seek the judgements of the firm in truth.

Critics rage about this line.

Um, some suggesting that the idea is that he's being judged to how, um, others that his soul couldn't possibly be up for salvation.

To me, this this line, it clearly leaves an open question.

It's seeking judgement. If the poet wanted us to know what that judgement was, presumably they would have told us.

Yeah. Sorry. That wasn't great. Okay, so I will leave that as open as a question to you, because it really is a matter of debates.

And the nice thing about studying this is that you don't have to believe the arguments that I tell you.

You get to come and look at the text and think about it for yourself. So moving back to our converted societal view.

I'm gonna show us some of the more interesting features of these newly Christianised kingdoms in the seventh century.

Starting with the, uh, very powerful role that women were able to play within the church.

And I'm going to ask a broader question is of how we with all sort of literary historian hats on.

Find out about the social status of women in early medieval England.

You might well come to a study of this period with a lot of assumptions about what rights or lack of rights women may have had.

Or you may be luxuriating in a sense of having no idea what the social context could have been.

Either way, this is fine. Um, what evidence might we use to test our assumptions?

And one avenue that we can use is legal documentation.

You might remember from last week.

Um, well, and indeed from earlier today that the missionaries landed in Sanatan, the Kingdom of Kent, 597 and the king at that time is called Alberta.

Okay. Probably in collaboration with Augustine Astle, but produced a charter of legal rules called a Law code.

Now, this law code, which we've got an image of on the slides, will have been one of the first documents ever written down in Old English,

as the missionaries were the ones who brought writing technology with them.

Our only copy of the Law Code, the image we've got on this slide, survives in a much later manuscript.

It's called the Rochester Manuscript.

It's from the 12th century, so this is actually been copied about 500 years after the original document was written.

It was clearly still felt to be important to preserve the record of the old law.

This law code gives us insight into the lives of contemporary people across different parts of society.

It tells us what issues were of concern to the people of the day, particularly the ruling classes, the church and the aristocracy.

And the laws that I've drawn out here deal with the property of the church,

and essentially with the financial penalties which were owed by people who committed crimes.

Most of the crimes in the law code relate to physical violence.

And we've got a few examples up here.

If you pulled a man's hair, uh, knocked out his teeth, or even cut off his big toe, there was a specific fine waiting for you.

Wear gold. We've got this word up at the top of our slides.

It's an old English compounds word that literally means man price.

We are aware means man. Guild is a word related to money.

And so here, man price, um, where is indeed the foundational part of the word werewolf?

Just, you know, the old English word where it's literally man wolf.

Happy Halloween. Um, it's an amount of compensation which you as a person are deemed to be worth.

Your waggles would be higher if you held a higher societal status, such as being a nobleman.

And there is a game somewhere other than academic produced online where you can, like,

find out what your well guild would have been in early medieval England might make quite depressing reading, but it's quite some.

Women are also mentioned on numerous occasions in this law codes.

This earliest piece of written down Old English text, and the way you were treated as a woman, was highly dependent on your social class.

This kind of intersection of class and gender remains culturally potent to this very day.

Probably something that you've thought about and it is enshrined in this document.

So I've pulled out a few of the laws that mention women and put them on the slide.

And you might feel heartened to see number 74. That's an unmarried woman gets the same compensation for injuries, a freeman.

Uh, noticeable, too, is the way that women are typically attached to men in these laws.

They are said to belong to various men. They are wives or they are daughters, or they are specifically demarcated as unmarried.

There's also significant attention in the text given over to fines owed by men who have illicit sex with women who are supposedly owned by other men.

So 31 if one freeman lies with the wife of another freeman,

he shall pay the husband his or her whereabouts and procure a second wife with his own money and bring her to the other man's home.

I think we need to spell out in terrible detail, um, the obvious property connotations that are happening here, right?

Okay, so this is the kind of evidence that we can use to talk about the objectification of women without moving off into sort of fluffy abstraction.

And you can bring this to other kinds of text if you're interested in gendered voices.

There were, however, a number of women who wielded significant power and influence in early medieval England,

and one such class of women were Abbasids and Abbasids.

A woman who runs an abbey of nuns, so anon,

is a woman who is withdrawn from daily life and entered a closed environment

to live in service to God through prayer and other pious spiritual activity.

In the seventh and eighth centuries. Ibises were in fact able to rule over what were called double houses, abbeys occupied by both monks and nuns.

The genders were separated, but they were associated together under the same house.

Aristocratic women often entered the church as offices, so we still very much have that class system integrated.

These women were placed there by their powerful families, it was often a way for powerful families to help cement their power spatially.

And one particularly influential abbess who had an impact on the course of Old English poetry was Hilde of Whitby.

Born in the early seventh century to well-connected parents who became abbess of

Whitby in the later decades of her life after first serving as Abbess of Hartlepool.

So, okay, I didn't even know that Hartlepool existed in this period, so I just thought that was really fun.

Um, and we're we're very much set in Northumbria here in one of the northern kingdoms of England.

Now the abbey at Whitby was an important place.

It hosted a hugely significant meeting called the Synod of Whitby in 664, which decided when Easter would be celebrated across England.

I cannot emphasise how important this was at the time and how much anger it caused at the time,

so the fact that it was hosted there and that Hill was presiding was hugely culturally significant.

Most interestingly for us, perhaps health features and the story of the first recorded Old English religious poem, a poem known as Cattlemen's Hymn.

And this story is related in Bede's Historia Ecclesiastical.

Catman was an illiterate cowherd living in the Abbey at Whitby.

So the story goes, he was at a party. Everyone was taking it in turns to sing songs.

Cavemen alone didn't know any songs and was embarrassed, so he snuck back out and went to his hut.

That an angel appeared to him and told him to sing.

After some initial prevarication, Cadman sings the song which is next on your handouts.

New shoe Loanhead, again half on the riches wagered, mattered as Martha and his modest sank while qualified as why he wouldn't.

There was extra hidden or unscheduled, had a shape else and bottom half and to offer hardly to spend the midnight Adam on his way out.

Its jerked, and after Toyota fit and fold on foot I Almaty.

Now we must praise the guardian of the heavenly kingdom. The might of the creator and the purpose of his mind.

The works of the Father of glory.

When he, the eternal Lord, laid the beginnings of every wondrous thing, a holy creator, he first fashioned heaven as a roof for the children of men,

then the guardian of humankind, the eternal Lord Almighty, ruler of the wood, fashioned the habitable world, the earth for men.

So it's a praise poem and a creation story. Have anyone from Saint Hilda's College just give me a little.

Yeah, high hills guys. Uh, every year at Hilda's, there is a performance of Kevin's hymns.

That's a new piece of music. So keep an eye out within your own college.

Everybody keep an eye out. What a magical thing. I only learned about it last year.

Okay, so let's talk a little bit about old English poetry itself and how it's different from the poetry you've encountered in later centuries.

Because when we first see Old English poetry on the page, particularly in the original language,

it's probably not particularly apparent to us how it structures work.

And yet its visual layout is obviously doing something structural that is very different for us.

So the key formal feature that we want to have an eye on with Old English first is the idea of the line and the half line.

Every line of Old English verse is made up of two half lines,

and in your additions this will generally be separated by a measure of blank space called a caesura.

In each half line, there must be at least one letter writing word.

You can have two of those in the first verse. So let's have a look at these examples.

This is from Cummins him actually.

And after Toyota you might be like is not the same as that other thing that does this thing is an ash sort of ash sound.

All vowels illiterate with each other in Old English.

We don't know exactly why, but one good guess is that when you make a vowel sounds, you first have to make a glottal stop with your throat.

Uh e I o u. It's, uh. Sounds.

So that might account for why we have something called vocaliq alliteration.

Um, the second line firm falls unfair on a bit clearer.

We have three illustrating FS, so that first of the two lines represents a very standard form of alliteration, one word in each half line.

The second line we have something called double alliteration because there is double the amount of required alliteration in that first half line,

even though there are three overall. That is a really good time to get your head around.

Okay. Uh, why does this matter? Well, this writing words can have significance if you are reading a Shakespearean sonnet.

Uh, you may well be looking at the rhymes at the end of lines to see if there are

connections between rhyming words that draw out or create particular themes,

tensions, problems, questions. And we can do exactly the same, uh, with Old English alliteration.

So here, for example, um, you know, we have the US, the letter writing with the Almighty Lord.

And this is a poem about creation.

So connecting God explicitly to that greatest thing of creation, the earth itself, um, is the kind of thing that we're looking for.

And certainly we're going to have more examples as we go on. However, it also is within a sonnet.

Not every instance of rhyme in that context is going to be meaningful because it is structural.

It is required to the poem. Not every instance of alliteration is going to throw up some interesting semantic connection or tension.

So it is something to be attuned to, to look into, but don't force it if you're not feeling it.

Um, double alliteration is interesting because it shows a poets going to extra kinds of effort to create that effect in of us.

Once again, if you've ever written poetry that rhymes, you know that hunting for rhyming words is sort of a tricky exercise.

We're trying to say the thing that you want to say while finding the sounds that you want to produce, and it's no difference with alliteration.

So if a poet is using double alliteration, they might just be doing it for the sound vibes,

but they might be working very hard to really emphasise a particular point moment passage.

Um, things to keep an eye out for when in poetry we get descriptions of art, beauty, ornamentation, song.

We often find alliteration in these areas.

The emphasis between the ornamentation of the verse form matching the idea of the semantic ornamentation in the narrative.

Okay, plenty of other examples too, but be particularly attuned to those moments of art and design.

All right, so back to health. Held was the opposite Whitby when Chapman produced his song.

According to beech, he's the one who tells the story. She encouraged Kidman's gifts and brought him into the monastic life.

So we've got this extract here on the slide. The abbess began to embrace and love the gift of God in that man,

and she exhorted and advised him that he should abandon the worldly life and accept monkeys.

She has some taught, as it says, the entirely series of holy stories and narrative.

So this would be the Bible, but it would quite possibly also relate to the lives of saints, holy people who lived after the time of the Bible.

And as the story goes on to tell, Cullman produces more poetry.

Now, of course, the church and its institutions were increasingly powerful and wealthy following the conversion.

Powerful families were able to consolidate their power by having a female kin member in charge of a religious house.

Whitby, for example, was led by women of the Northumbrian royal family for many decades after his death.

So even though these women may be portrayed as having withdrawn from the world in pursuit of an ascetic Christian life,

so a life of self-denial and rigour, they were also active participants in the power creation of kinship groups and minor kingdoms.

It's worth noting that many nuns would have been literate in the eighth century.

We've said that throughout the medieval period, particularly this early stage,

literacy is extremely limited across the population professional religious people, aristocrats, and not even to everybody in those categories.

We don't have any poems in Old English that we know to have been written by women, but as most Old English poems are anonymous anyway,

it's entirely possible that a number of them are female authored in Virginia Woolf writing about anonymous histories of literature,

or rather anonymous literature in history. Um is commonly mis quoted as saying, anon has always been a woman,

and I can't remember the accurate quote, because that is nice and catchy, and that's why it's misquoted.

Um, but reading A Room of One's Own is actually a really interesting way to get into some of

the same kinds of issues that we might think about when we're reading this literature.

So I strongly recommend, um, if you haven't. We do have poetry in Latin that we know to have been written by women,

so there's just no reason at all to suppose that all of the authors of our text are male.

Um, in the old days, and by the old days, I mean like 15, 20 years ago,

people were still using the sort of as it was unmarked male porno male to refer to scribes and authors.

It's much more is increasingly common now to use the gender neutral pronoun after kind of shift period of he she, so you can do as you see fit.

But if you want to attribute gender, you might bear in mind that your examiners might expect you to justify that.

Okay. Within England. The eighth century was a golden age of Christian learning.

Writers such as All and Beads produced reams of theological work in poetry and in prose.

And this is the century when we assume many Old English poems to have been originally composed, including Beowulf.

Seventh century. Really? The religious power that noble women could hold across the seventh and eighth centuries did not last forever.

It would be curtailed during the religious reforms of the 10th century, which we will deal with in a future lecture.

And there's lots of work on women's, uh, women's, uh, lives and women's voices in early medieval England.

I'm really hardly scratching the surface here, but hopefully this gives you a taste of what you might look into,

what kind of evidence and sources you might go to to supplement your reading of other material.

Ultimately, one of the reasons that this was such a golden age for learning was because it was a comparatively peaceful time in the British Isles.

It was a time in which international trade routes brought goods from far off lands to an elite market of English aristocrats.

You might have heard of great burial mounds at Sutton, who which was first excavated in 1938.

You won't see in the movie The Dig. Few hands, like a really good movie, followed by like a kind of rubbish movie all within one movie.

But the Sultan who bit the beginning is is really quite good.

Um. Yes. It is quite beautiful.

Really. Okay. Sutton, who is a high status burial site.

And the mounds excavated in 1938 contain the remains of a ship laden with treasures.

And people have connected this to the opening of Beowulf. Westworld shaping a set off into the sea in a ship full of treasures.

Now, this is very much not in the sea. The ship is in a mountain.

It is believed to be the final resting place of the powerful Anglian king Riedewald, who died in the six 20s.

Um, I haven't put Redwood's name on the slide so well spelled out in case you want it.

That's already a algae.

The grave contains a wealth of beautifully ornamented treasures,

which tell us something about how the Anglian saw themselves and the relation to the rest of the world.

We'll let you just glance at this map a minute. I don't. So we have this helmet.

Got an image of that on the slide. It's actually the structure of a helmet with the remaining bits sort of pasted on.

Also in the British Museum. Uh, and they have a reconstruction there to.

It's ornamented with Scandinavian features. So these sort of big, heavy eyebrows, there's, uh, motifs on the side of Dancing Warriors.

Um, but it's also, uh, decorated with Roman features.

We've got inlaid garnets, uh, and cheek guards.

So it's what we might call a syncretic style, a style that amalgamate, um, different cultural features.

The grave had hanging bowls which were imported from Celtic regions, possibly Ireland, and also a number of imported goods.

A silver platter made in Constantinople, which is now Istanbul.

Silver Byzantine spoons. Coins from across Francia.

Um. And indeed, this ivory lidded purse.

That's what it is. So this. Beautifully shaped object is the lid that would have been attached to a purse.

It had, um, coins inside it. And the ship also has bitumen that comes from Syria.

So we are thinking about some really long trade routes here.

Foreign trade had really picked up by the year 700. Bede, uh, writes about having Arabian incense and Indian pepper in his possession.

And we have remains of cowrie shells, Chinese silk and ivory from the time.

Again. There is a strong intersection here with class.

These are high status objects, um, at the levels of the labour it takes to produce them, the long distance trade and simply the raw materials.

This wouldn't have been common everyday stuff, but it was in England.

You might remember that in his account of the migration beat in the Historia Ecclesiastical,

the history of the English people divides the German migrants of the fifth century into three groups the angles, the Saxons and the Jutes.

And he tells us about how they settle into different regions of the British Isles.

And accordingly, there was not a single unified Kingdom of England, um, in the early period.

Rather, by the eighth century, uh, so the seven hundreds,

the southeast of Britain was divided into seven major kingdoms, and this is now known as the heptagon for seven.

And arche is like, uh, form of rule, a form of governance.

So yeah, we have a map on the slide.

I've not drawn borders because the borders shifted all the time, but this is where the kingdoms were placed, approximately.

The kingdoms were often at war with one another, and different kingdoms achieved supremacy at different points in time.

Kingship could also exist at different levels over kings might have lesser

kings appointed beneath them in order to have control over wider territories.

A ruler who had power beyond his immediate kingdom may have been known as a Brett Wilder ruler of Britain or wide ruler,

but no one in this period ever commanded dominance over all of the kingdoms of the heck Turkey, and power remained in a place of struggle.

Now everything was about to go terribly, terribly wrong for these, uh, seventh and eighth century kingdoms,

because a new wave of invaders was showing increasing interest in the territory of Britain.

I found this cake for sale many years ago at a fantastic cake shop that used to be in the covered market, and it's gone.

And I don't have a lot of regrets in life. I had a great life, but I do regret never having purchased this cake when the shop was still open.

Uh, Vikings? Vikings. Okay, this is a cake. This is not a real ship.

Um, the ninth century was overshadowed by the total devastation caused by the Vikings.

These Scandinavian warriors arrived in ships from the late eighth century.

So the late 1700s initially carrying out smash and grab raids, uh, but eventually invading proper and then settling in Britain.

So a sort of cumulative motion, not unlike what the Anglo-Saxons and Jutes had themselves been doing some hundreds of years earlier.

Right? The first record of a Viking raid is made in the 787 entry of the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle.

Uh, this is number two on your. You know, it's not number two, but it is on your handout.

Okay. 787. Patrick took care of his daughter Edberg, for life.

And in his days came the first three ships of the Northmen.

That's how they refer to the Vikings. The Northmen from horse land.

The reeve roads there and tried to force them to go to the king's dwelling, because he did not know what they were.

And then he was killed. Those were the first ships of Danish men to seek out the land of the English.

So this account relates to points in time where sailors land on the coast.

A reef. So a local official rides down and tries to bring them to his king.

Right? That's him doing his due diligence, making sure that strangers come before the ruler and they kill him.

You might remember that in Beowulf, when our eponymous hero arrives in Denmark,

he and his retinue are met by a coast guard, who then guides them to Herod's, where the king is.

So clearly this reflects something about contemporary practice and what you were supposed to do when you were new somewhere.

So this source, which I've just read is from this text called the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle.

But what is the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle? It is a collection of annals of records written in Old English,

providing an account of early medieval history, particularly as it pertains to the British Isles.

From the first write up to the 12th centuries. It was first put together in the ninth century.

So King Alfred's period, um, for entries before its time, the authors had to use historical sources like Bede.

We're reading Bede now for the history they were reading beat, then for the history.

There is not one definitive copy of the Anglo-Saxon Chronicles.

It exists in various copies, and there are differences between them,

because people kept adding stuff to them over time and creating slightly different, um, versions.

On the slide, we've got an image from the earliest surviving copy, the Parker Chronicle, which was made during King Alfred's reign.

There's a version known as the Peterborough Chronicle, which is kept in Peterborough,

and it's particularly interested in the history of Peterborough, so people were tuned to their local events.

The Chronicles are a vitally important set of sources for our understanding of early medieval English history.

But as ever, we must approach them with caution and think about the agendas, biases, and predilections of that creators.

We'll be talking about the Anglo-Saxon Chronicles more, but for now, back to our Viking invaders.

In the year 793, a yet greater calamity befell the English.

We talked briefly last week about the Christian centre in Northumbria called Lindisfarne, which still exists to this day.

You may well be familiar or even have visited. It was established in five, six, three.

And the church in general was quite capable of amassing significant wealth by the eighth century,

both in the form of lands, but also money, high status religious objects,

ornamented books, sacred metalwork, and the Vikings themselves were pagan and had absolutely no qualms about attacking Christian churches,

which were typically poorly funded. And in 9793 they sacked Lindisfarne, killed the monks who was there.

Um, and we have, uh, another entry to that effect on your handout.

793. Here, terrible portents came about in the lands of Northumbria and miserably afflicted the people.

These were immense flashes of lightning and fiery dragons were seen flying in the air.

And there immediately followed a great famine.

And after that, in the same year, the raising of the heathen miserably devastated God's church in Lindisfarne island by looting and slaughter.

So note that the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle is not what we would now think of as a historically reliable source.

It includes aspects of prognostication. Prognostication means divination.

It is looking into the future, using clues or indications to figure out what the future is.

And that could change things like weather, which we might still engage in a little bit.

You know, red sky at night, sharp edged like that sort of thing. Um, but also sort of cosmic motions like lightning, um, and medical things.

Uh, one of my students told me about a manuscript they'd seen this summer where the different colours of urine were laid out,

and what ailment you might expect to have based on the colour of your urine.

Um, in the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle entry that I've just read, this is captured in the word Fed of Buechner.

This is a compound word made up of four day and back, and four day means before and back in, uh, which turns into modern English.

Beacon means sign. So a sign that comes before an event.

And the portents in this case were lightning and supposedly dragons in the sky.

Um, we don't necessarily know that this is to be taken literally.

Um, it may have been understood to represent something more likely to be real, but it's not clear.

Right?

It's important to note that while this attack horrified people up and down Britain, it did not necessarily shake their faith in a Christian God.

Right. You might think an attack on your major religious centre would do some kind of damage.

Sort of the opposite. In fact, an English scholar by the name of Alcorn was living in France here.

Um, so the area that is now France, working in the court of King Charlemagne at the time that Lindisfarne was sacked,

and he wrote a condolence letter to the Bishop of Lindisfarne.

Also on your handouts. Alcuin writes this.

Do not be dismayed by this disaster. God chastises every son whom he accepts.

So perhaps he has chastised you more because he loves you more. Yeah.

Remember that your tutorials, uh, Jerusalem, a city loved by God, was destroyed with the temple of God in Babylonian flames.

Rome, surrounded by its company of holy apostles and countless martyrs,

was devastated by the heathen, but quickly recovered through the goodness of God.

Almost the whole of Europe has been denuded with fire and swords by Goths and Huns.

But now, by God's mercy, is as bright with churches as the sky with stars, and in them the offices of the Christian religion grow and flourish.

Encourage each other, saying, let us return to the Lord our God, for he is very forgiving and never deserts those who hope in him.

So there was actually a very venerable Christian tradition of demonstrating your

faithfulness to God by living through devastation and not complaining about it.

The Book of Job in the Christian Bible tells the story of a man who is God's best servant on earth, goaded by the devil.

Although some people would read that differently, uh, God kills job's children,

destroys his livelihood, and gives him terrible sicknesses and job remains fun.

Right. So this is a sort of biblical model for this kind of perseverance.

These Viking attacks then were totally devastating to the English, but initially they were just sporadic raids.

Even Lindisfarne, really. In the 1860s, however, a large army of Danes led by Ivor the Boneless, which is a great name,

arrived to settle in East Anglia and unprepared for this invasion, the English kingdoms very quickly fell to the Viking invaders.

In eight six, nine. The East Anglian king Edmonds was killed.

And because the Vikings were pagans who destroyed churches. Because Edmund was killed by them, here he is.

Uh. He was eventually canonised as a saint. So this is a manuscript image.

Probably later, to be honest, um, of Edmund's being stuck full of arrows by a group of heathen invaders.

In the following century, a churchman called Al Fritsch wrote a story of Edmond's life.

And I've put some extracts on your handouts. So we have here, uh, on the virtues of King Edmonds.

Here we are.

It eventually happened that the Danish people set out with a ravaging fleet and slaying widely throughout the land, just as is their custom.

Okay, so for this story, it's an inherent part of Danish identity to slaughter.

And we're going to see that kind of characterisation of Danish identity continue to run through the early period on the ship,

they were foremost the captains hunger and harbour united through the devil,

and they arrived in Northumberland with spears and laid waste to that land and slew the people.

So Hengoed settles down to East Anglia. Blackmails King Edmonds, um, who was advised by Bishop to give in to the Raiders demands.

But King Edmonds says as he was very brave, text words not mine.

This I wish and desire with my heart that I will not survive alone.

After my beloved Danes, who were suddenly slain in their beds with their wives and children by these seamen,

it was never customary for me that I should take flight, but I would rather die if I need for my own land.

And the Almighty God knows that I will never turn from his observances ever, nor from his true love, whether I live or die.

Little [INAUDIBLE] smell. Whether I live or die. The first interesting thing here is a set up an approach to authenticity.

All fits really wants us to know that this story is a true one, and part of the longer quotation on your handout shows that Alfred says that he's

getting this story as one that was initially told by Edmond's own sword bearer,

someone bound to Edmund in loyalty and present with him in battle.

And the story has then been passed down to Alfred via Bishop Dunstan, and then via a learned monk who himself writes it down.

So even though lots of our historical sources are not what we would think of as reliable or accurate sources,

there was a concern with historical veracity. Fake news was as a problem, as much done as it is now.

Um, and the ways of countering it seems to be giving little genealogies of West stories

that come from Bede's does the same thing at the start of the history ecclesiastical.

So that's one thing. Second thing, the Danes are presented very clearly as evil and anti-Christian.

Their leaders are united by the devil. This is not intended as a metaphor, and they are occupied entirely in widespread unexplained slaughter.

Third, Edmund's refusal to give in to the demands of the Vikings is very much in line with other,

much older saints lives, where dedicated Christians refuse to accede to the demands of their pagan tormentors.

Edmund's own political objectives, presumably of remaining King of Anglia, are elided in favour of a very pious interpretation.

He does not wish to abandon his beloved people who are already dead right, and he will not neglect to serve God.

This is the narrative that Alfred wants us to have about this King.

Fun fact Saint Edmund is the patron saint of pandemics.

So. Do with that what you will. By the late 1870s, all of those seven kingdoms of the hep talkie, um had really been overrun.

And it was only Wessex, which is sort of south and central that remained as a kind of rump state, uh, for the Danes to conquer.

Um, in eight, seven, eight it was overridden by the Danes, forcing the young West Saxon King Alfred into hiding in the marshes of Iceland.

This is where we start getting much later stories about Alfred running the cakes.

This is not an early medieval story. It's a later medieval story. Um, Alfred in exile in the marshes.

And the situation was about to improve dramatically for the English generally and for the people of the kingdom of Wessex specifically.

On the slide, we have an account of an encounter between Alfred and some Danes, the town of Warum in Dorset in the year 876.

Okay. In this year, the host eluded the West Saxon levies and got into the Warum.

The host here refers to the host of Viking invaders.

The army and the king made peace with the host.

And they swore him oaths on the sacred ring, which Eliot they would not do to any nation, that they would quickly leave his kingdom.

And then, under cover of disagreement, they evaded the English levies by night,

and the mounted host got into Exeter, which they probably promptly destroyed.

Sorry, Exeter. It's something, uh. It's sometimes thought that the holy ring in the story might be a pagan oath ring.

Um, the idea that Alfred may have had the pagan army swear on a pagan object in order to persuade them to retreat peacefully.

But anyway, it didn't work. We have a different account of the same story by Alfred's biographer, the Welshman Asser,

in which the reference to this possibly pagan youth wing is quietly removed.

And it's just another example of the shaping of narratives to present pious images of King's.

So this period really was the nadir for the English kingdoms and their people.

But Alfred managed to rally, and in 1878 he won a battle against the Danish leader goose from its Edington.

And then he went on to win a series of decisive victories across the south and west of the islands,

bringing together the various peoples of the former kingdoms under West Saxon rule.

People talk about sort of the recovery of Wessex in this period. It's not really recovery.

Wessex is growing to expand and take in places that it had never formerly owned.

Alfred brokered a deal with the Danes. They would live in the East Anglian region of the country, an area that became known as the Danelaw.

And to this day, that part of England which includes Leicestershire, Yorkshire and Derbyshire retains some features,

particularly idiomatic and slang of Norse language in localised dialect and in place names.

So place name elements like thorpe and B endings like Grimsby.

These come down from Norse language and from the Danes. The West Saxons hadn't ruled all of England before, but suddenly, um,

they had taken over an enormous area of new territory under Alfred, the term Anglican.

Literally, the people of the angles comes into greater use,

and the once separate kingdoms of hepatology begin to come together as England, the land of the angles.

Quite aside from Alfred's military victories. Uh, he's a super interesting guy.

He spent a good portion of his life in significant physical suffering while

governing his people and engaging in private and public intellectual activity.

So I've mentioned he had a biographer by the name of Asher. It's well worth reading Ass's Life of King Alfred.

It's very short. It's quite entertaining. Uh, he was a monk, Asher, born in Wales, who joined Alfred's court in about eight,

eight, five, and he died in 909, about ten years after Alfred's own death.

And during this period he wrote an account of Alfred's life in Latin,

and this text gives us an up close and personal, very intimate view of Alfred himself.

Asser wants to present Alfred as a wise, virtuous and pious king.

In fact, many, uh, sorry, many have said that this text resembles hagiography.

Hagiography is a word that we can use to talk about saints lives, the lives of God's elect, of the holiest people.

Although it purports to tell the true account of Alfred's life, it's actually very closely modelled on some other ninth century lives.

One of King Charlemagne, and Alfred is presented as a saintly figure chosen by God to lead his people from affliction.

He must overcome physical and spiritual hardship, but his devotion to God,

according to this narrative, ensures that he will be victorious over enemies of the faith.

Um, you might note on the slide I have put this.

Yes. He was only the fifth son, um, of his father.

His ascension to the throne, uh, was safest son.

I might be in Fifth Child. Uh, but his ascension to the throne was something of a historical accidents.

His older brothers all died, including in battle. Right.

Uh, so he was never really meant to be king.

However, as his account consistently portrays the young Alfred as the most beloved son of his parents and the superior among the five boys.

So we have this text on the slide now. He, Alfred, was greatly loved more than all his brothers, which just like really rude,

um, by his father and mother, indeed by everybody with a universal and profound love.

And he was always brought up in the royal court and nowhere else.

As he passed through infancy and boyhood, he was seen to be more comely in appearance than his other brothers,

and more pleasing in manner, speech and behaviour.

The royal courts in nowhere else. Um. There were practices throughout the period of fostering out to your children, to relatives like it was.

It was perfectly normal. So might be a reference to that. The idea that he stayed within the court.

We should be very suspicious of all of these kind of claims, as his work is as much a cementing of Alfred's power as a record of past events.

Now, Alfred was unwell for much of his life, and this is the physical side of the hardship that acid presents him as overcoming.

I'm going to read you a section of his biography which gives an account of Alfred's illness,

and we'll think briefly about what we learn about medieval approaches to illness and disability.

I am going to read it to you. But I'm not quite sure where.

Here we go. All right. Alfred's illness.

He was struck without warning, Alfred in the presence of the entire gathering by sudden severe pain that was quite unknown to all physicians.

Certainly, it was not known to any of those who were present on that occasion,

nor to those up to the present day who have inquired how such an illness could arise.

And worst of all, the loss could continue so many years without remission.

From his 20th year up to his 40th and beyond.

Many alleged that age the illness happens through the spells and witchcraft of the people around him,

others through the ill will of the devil, who was always envious of good men.

Others thought that it was the result of some unfamiliar type of fever.

Still others thought that it was due to the piles because he had suffered this particular kind of agonising irritation, even from his youth.

So note the various moral approaches to Alfred's illness in the passage that I've read, as he says that this is like what people are saying.

It's presumably kind of a convenient trope. You know, we do like people were saying, we should do this.

Like it's way to draw in the various accounts of Alfred's illness that Astor wants to address.

He notes that.

