[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
So the handout for this lecture is on the canvas page for the Cultural Context lectures.

Um I'm going to give you a minute because I do really want you to have it up.

And if you haven't got your own one up, you can look over the shoulder of someone there by.

We can have loads of the material, uh, really up here on the slides.

It's going to be a main point of focus, and both the slides and the handout will be available online after the lecture as well.

So you'll be able to pick up anything and catch up or watch back if you so wish.

Uh, so I'm going to give you a minute to go ahead and look for that and bring that up.

And then we'll begin. It would actually be really helpful if somebody who has managed to find it online could wave at me so that I know it exists.

All right. We'll get cracking. Feel free to be looking it up gently in the background.

To be honest, at least for the first part of this lecture. Everything is going to be on the slides anyway, so this should be fine.

Um, welcome to well, your first, I guess, substantive lecture on medieval literature.

We had the introduction just before this. My name's Rachel. Uh, hope to see you lots at various lectures throughout the year.

Um, and you can reach me at this email address if you have any questions about either the

lecture contents or early medieval literature on its study at Oxford more generally.

So, uh, prelims paper two. It spans an incredible 700 years of history from about 650 to 1350.

And in these four introductory lectures will mainly be thinking about that period that runs up to the year 1100.

A lot happens in these centuries, and I strongly suggest that you keep your own timeline of the events that you learn about.

It'll be really useful for revision and help you keep mental track of the events in this long period.

And it's very unusual for students to have read much, or indeed anything, by way of Old English literature before they arrive at university.

And that's in part why we have these lectures in weeks 1 to 4.

A really important way of getting you settled in the period. So if you are feeling lost in the sea of the medieval, that is fine.

And they write about being lost in the sea, we will connect with them.

I'm going to be outlining for you many of the essentials of the culture and the history of this period,

across the four lectures that we have on the slide together.

We're going to think about how history is expressed. Um, double sided printing.

That's not great. Through people, objects and texts. And if you attend all of these lectures,

you will leave more confidence in your understanding of what drove and inspired and troubled the writers of this period.

In the course of your studies, you are going to hear different narratives about the Middle Ages.

Actually, by the end of today, you will have heard different narratives about the Middle Ages.

They will not all line up with each other, because in the end,

it's going to be up to you to determine how you think the rich literary traditions of early English work,

and how they plug in to the baroque long history of English literature that follows.

Just before we begin, very quick content note this lecture will include discussion of a story involving rape and a discussion of slavery and racism.

I give this note so that you're not completely taken by surprise when these kinds of topics arise.

But please note you know I'll always do what I can to treat them sensitively in the moment regardless.

Okay. Let's start by getting your bearings.

How long ago is the early medieval period? When you tell people back at home that you're studying old English.

They may well say like Shakespeare, Chaucer, um, and all period is before, long before either of those giants of English literature.

Shakespeare died in 1605. So about four centuries ago.

Chaucer died in 1400. Really convenient. 600 years ago.

Much Old English literature was written as long before Chaucer lived as Chaucer lived before us.

Right. That's how far back we're going in time.

Um, and a quick reminder for you in the bottom right hand corner that if I refer to the 10th century, I'm talking about the nine hundreds.

If I refer to the eighth century, I'm talking about the seven hundreds and so forth.

But our story today actually begins before 650, before the start of this paper.

It begins in 410 in Roman Britain. In early medieval England.

They thought about the Roman Empire a lot.

It was part of the history of the British Isles, and also a lasting cultural monument of power and authority.

The Romans had begun their conquest of Britain in the year 55 BC.

Um, and they gained dominance over a large part of the island, which was enhanced habitat by native Celtic tribes, who we generally call the Britons.

The Romans run a prosperous society in Britain for centuries.

But by the middle of the fourth century, the empire was facing military pressures in continental Europe,

and they began to withdraw their forces from Britain.

Finally, in the Air Force and the Britons were told that they must defend their own land from attack.

So Roman society declined and petered out in Britain, but its marks remains on the landscape Roman cities, villas, temples, amphitheatres and baths.

Um, and many of you who have either lived or visited across England may well be familiar with such things.

Whether you come from a town that has the remains of a bath or an amphitheatre, or whether you were taken on a school trip to such things as a child.

These would have been looted for stone as building materials,

but could have survived in some quite recognisable form for hundreds of years as a reminder of the Roman past.

On the slide, we have a screenshot from the 2020 video game Assassin's Creed Valhalla.

Um, it's anyone hit play Assassin's Creed. Oh, we got a hand.

Amazing. Uh, I actually really bought a video game,

so I have attempted to play this simply because it gives a really beautiful visual representation of 10th century England, but, uh, not very good.

Uh, the makers of creatively reimagined early medieval London has studied with Roman ruins.

Now text number one on your handout, which is sadly only on your handout.

So I hope that you've managed to get that up. You can see one there by you. It's the beginning of a rather lovely old English poem known as The Ruin.

It was composed around the eighth century, seven hundreds long after the decline of Roman Britain.

Right. Because 300 odd years after that decline.

But scholars have suggested that the poet may have been describing the ruins remains of a Roman bathhouse, perhaps in bath or someone like Chester.

I'm going to read it to an Old English and then in translation. So follow along on your handouts or just listen in if you prefer.

That glitch is. That's whale [INAUDIBLE] on. Where do you break on?

Boog shed a burst on but not enter your work cut off for you heard any rewrite talk us through.

Gets cut off and on Lima shell.

They should be okay. Should Ana,

you draw in a isles or undertone to a or scrap half walled and work done for way or ona yellow or Dina hardscrabble who son of a way or soda you ton.

And in English, modern English, I should say it's all English.

Wondrous is this stone wall smashed by fate.

The buildings have crumbled. The work of giants decays.

Roofs have collapsed. The tower is in ruin.

The frosted gate is on barred hoarfrost on mortar.

The storm protection mutilated, cut down, declined.

Undermined by age. The Earth's grip holds.

Powerful makers decayed, passed away the hard grasp of the Earth.

Until a hundred generations of the nation of men have passed away.

Now. This poem is a beautiful meditation on the forceful presence through absence of the past,

a past which existed in the imagination rather than in living memory.

And you can hear how the remains of these buildings on the landscape is evocative for the poet,

when he's actually thinking about the people, the previous generations who have been on the lands before.

Now in the handout. If you have it, when you have it, if you don't.

Right now, you might notice that I've placed certain letters in bold and that in any given line, these letters in bold illiterates with one another.

Old English poetry generally does not rhyme. Instead, its lines are strung together by alliteration.

Let's make sure we're all on the same page. What's alliteration?

Alliteration is the occurrence of the same letter or the same sound at the start of words close to each other.

So in line one or letter writing sound is w right?

Is thus whale shun. Where do you con?

Almost all Old English first lines will have either 2 or 3 words in them which illiterates with one another,

and these lines from the start of the ruin all have three such words,

and this shows the poet going to some particular kind of effort to instil in our intensity in the passage of a little warning.

Note here that when we write about alliteration, we are sometimes tempted to attach abstract values to sounds.

We might talk about mournful double use, or like the strength of the d sound or the plosive b.

Like. Sometimes this can work, but generally not because we can probably all think of words that start with W that have nothing mournful about them.

We can think of words that start with D or plosive sounds that in fact carry something semantically very far away from something powerful and plosive.

Um, what we really want to think about with something like alliteration is how does it connect words across a divide?

If two words illiterate with one another, do they come together to reinforce some kind of theme?

Do they have a clash that creates a kind of tension,

especially as you'll be starting to notice we have this break down the middle of Old English lines called our caesura.

If that break, intentional connection is happening across as a zero, that gives us something to think about.

So keep away from the abstract meaning of sounds, and instead run towards what the meanings of those words together might suggest to you as a reader.

Now you might notice, especially once you get used to translating Old English,

that the poets have suggested illiterates words that work well together to create a theme.

So in line two, the words burst on crumbled illiterates with the words snuff decays.

It's a nice, straightforward kind of connection. The alliteration being used to emphasise the collapse of that ruin.

So this poem is a poem of wonder. It's a poem of loss of memory, too, but not exactly of nostalgia for a poet.

Isn't imagining a time so long past that no one living would have experienced it.

It meditates on the transience that afflicts and affects all human life, and you will find this a theme visited time and again in Old English verse.

The early medieval English lived in a physical and intellectual landscape that constantly reminded them of the past.

Decline of Roman Britain. Okay, so the Romans have withdrawn.

And after this happens, our account of history becomes murky for quite some time.

We know that without the protection of the Roman military,

the remaining Celtic Britons and any Romans who stayed behind our citizens were highly vulnerable to attack from their neighbours.

We had their Pictish neighbours in the north in what is now Scotland, as well as raiders coming from the south.

We also know that Germanic tribes began to arrive in Britain during the course of the fifth century.

However, for the specific events between 410 and the end of the sixth century were highly dependent on

a small number of sources whose historical accuracy cannot remotely be taken for granted.

So one of these sources is a text called On the Conquest and Destruction of Britain,

written by a Welsh monk called Gildas, is the first one on a slide around the year 517.

So the late sixth century, and Gildas tells the story of what he calls the Adventist Saxons, the coming of the Saxons.

According to Gildas, one of the British kings invited the Saxons into Britain as mercenaries to defend them from the Picts.

But this was a gamble that did not pay off. So I'm going to read an extract which is number two on your handouts.

Then all the councillors, together with that proud king, were together and the British king was so blinded that house of protection to their country,

they sealed its doom by inviting in among them, like wolves into the sheepfold, the fierce and impious Saxons,

a race hateful both to gods and men to repel the invasions of the northern nations.

They, the Saxons, first landed on the eastern side of the islands by the invitation of the unlucky king,

and to their fixed their sharp talons, apparently to fight in favour of the island, but alas, more truly against it then motherland,

finding her first brood thus successful, sends forth a larger company of her wolfish offspring, which,

sailing over, join themselves to their [INAUDIBLE] born comrades, some, therefore, of the miserable remnant.

The Britons being taken in the mountains were murdered in great numbers.

Others, constrained by famine, came and yielded themselves to be slaves forever to their foes,

running the risk of being instantly slain, which truly was the greatest favour that could be offered to them.

Some of us passed beyond the seas with loud lamentations.

So, according to Gildas writing in the late five hundreds, the traitorous Saxon mercenaries turned on their employers.

They murdered and slaved and exiled the hapless Britons in order to take the land for themselves.

However it kills us. His account is at odds with archaeological evidence that we have.

Which suggests that the Celtic Britons were not wiped out, but lived alongside the Germanic tribes and even assimilated into their culture.

A process like that probably still involves its fair share of violence and bloodshed,

but it may be very different from the wholesale slaughter and punishment which Gildas relates.

So why would guilt us write this account? It's important to think about his own agenda as a Christian interpreter of events.

Gildas believes in divine punishment.

This is the idea that when bad things happen, it is because God is angry with humans for committing sins and kills us.

Believes that the British Celtic aristocracy and clergy had offended God, and so the Saxons were sent as a punishment.

Scholars have noted that Gildas is far more interested in presenting a narrative of sin

and punishment than he is in what we would today consider to be historical accuracy,

and this is something that you might encounter in other prose texts this year.

In Old English.

If you look at Bede's Ecclesiastical History or other later historical writings, you have to try and unpick the agendas of those historians.

It's important to note that Gildas is not lying.

At least from his own perspective, he is not lying because to him, the moral story is the true one, tied to his deep Christian faith.

Gilda says accounts was used by a later famous English monk, writing almost two centuries later, the Venerable Bede.

Beads was an extremely learned and again deeply religious scholar who wrote a history of the English people

called Historia Ecclesiastical Genesis and gloried the ecclesiastical history of the English people.

Now, once again, we cannot rely upon its text for accuracy per se.

But like Gildas, his account, it tells us something about the interests and prejudices of Bede's time.

Right? We're not necessarily scratching through the surface of these biases to find out some kind of historical truth.

We're actually using those biases as evidence for what is important to these writers.

So again on your handout is an extract from Ecclesiastical History. And I'll read out just the italicised section.

Beat says those who came over to England were if the three most powerful nations of the Germans,

Saxons, angles and Jutes from the Jutes are descended the people of Kent and the Isle of Wight,

and also those in the province of the West Saxons, who are to this day called Jews, seated opposite to the Isle of Wight.

From the Saxons, that is, the country which is now called Old Saxony, came the East Saxons, the South Saxons, and the West Saxons from the angles,

that is, the country which is called Anglia, and which is said from that time to remain deserts to this day.

And Ionia, England. So feel about that between the provinces of the Jutes and the Saxons are descended the East Angles, the Midland Angles, merchants,

all the rays of Northumbria, and that is, of those nations that dwell on the north side of the River Humber and the other nations of the English.

It's a lot of information. Um. Raise your hand if you're from London.

Great and still raise your hand if you were from East Anglia.

You know, Cambridgeshire and Peterborough, that sort of thing. Right? Uh, what about anyone from Essex?

Sussex. Yeah, I've got a few. Great. Northumberland.

Okay. So great. Welcome, everybody.

Uh, I mean, the names of these places to this day corresponds with the account that Bede has just given us, the West Saxons.

This is where Wessex comes from. South Saxons in Old English Sussex.

Sussex. East Saxons a6. Essex. Um, Northumberland comes from Northumbria, literally north of the Humber, the River Humber.

Um. These are not remotely the only Old English names to stay welded into the topography of modern England.

Um, Mercia, a big kingdom in Anglo-Saxon England, now really just known as the name for the police force in Mercia.

Fine. So according to be these three Germanic tribes, Anglo Saxons, Jutes are the forerunner of all the later kingdoms in England.

They spread across really down into Devon, not quite to the far tip of Cornwall,

as a Celtic outpost all the way up to Wales, where we have Offa's [INAUDIBLE] now and really up into what is Scotland now.

So Dumfriesshire was part of early medieval England.

The map on the slide represents Bede's account of this migration.

Okay. Broadly where they went. You might.

Yeah. So replacement or acculturation?

Ooh. Okay. This is fun. We're coming to this. So Germanic tribes migrated from mainland Europe into England, settling on British lands.

But rather than being replaced, the British most likely underwent a process of acculturation.

Acculturation is the process of assimilating into a different culture.

And because the new Germanic tribes with dominance, the native Celts sought to become more like them, speaking their language, adopting their customs.

You might say, how do we know this from logical evidence. Burial customs.

Burial customs really differed quite widely between countries and tribes at this point in time.

And we can see what kind of grave goods people were buried in, whether they were cremated or intimated other things like that.

Why is any of this important? Why are we? Why are we here? Why does it quite matter how the Anglo-Saxons in jeeps arrives?

And what happens to the Celtic Britons? I mean, we could just talk about it on its own terms.

We're here studying English literature. We believe that studying literature has some value in itself.

And we might feel the same way about history.

Um, but believe it or not, it also for a long time has had and continues to hold and sadly will continue to hold political currency.

So the conquest of Britain by the Germanic tribes became extremely politically significant.

Uh, centuries later in the 1800s in Europe, nationalism was on the rise in Europe across the 19th century,

and scholars, particularly historians and linguists, contributed to an obsession with national origins.

This is the period of time in which um various provinces are becoming united as respectively, Germany and Italy.

Uh, we have a lot of border crises and a lot of concern with who speaks certain languages,

who is of a certain ethnic background and who belongs within a national outline.

Right. Um, nationalists wanted to find and preserve what they believed were the pure.

I'm using big square coats here, pure histories of different nations.

They even wanted to change the borders of countries in their own times to match these perceived histories.

For English nationalists of the Victorian period. The wiping out of the Celtic Britons meant that the Anglo-Saxons and Jews had established dominion

over a pure Germanic England that linked them in the 1800s to Germany in the present moment.

Know the quotation on the slide.

The first one, by John Richard Green, celebrates this idea that the modern day English nation begins with these Germanic migrants.

He says it is with the landing of Hangst and his warband at Ebbsfleet, on the shores of the Isle of Thanet, that English history begins.

No spot in Britain could be so sacred to Englishmen as that which first felt the tread of English feet.

Okay, so Hangst is one of the early Germanic migrating settlers.

Uh, Sonet. East Anglia and Cairns in general.

Constant landing sites over the centuries for invasions of the British Isles.

For obvious reasons, it's the closest to the continent. Um, John Richard Green isn't interested in the fact that Celtic Britons were there,

and the language and culture contributed to the development of British culture.

Um, and goodness knows what he thought about the arrival of French culture after the, uh, Norman Conquest.

This is a very specific, uh, kind of approach to the idea of nation, which would not hold up to historical scrutiny, but held powerful currency.

Um, really not only in the late 19th century as he's writing, but really right through and into the 20th century.

If it all sounds a bit fascist, that's because it is.

Um, it's precisely these ideas of pure national origin and of a shared Germanic heritage between various European territories,

which drove first German expansionism in the 1860s and carried on into Nazi ideologies of the Second World War,

for which there was plenty of support in Britain. These ideas aren't just dangerous.

They're also deeply inaccurate and the kind of work that we do.

Exploring complexities of feeling on national identity movement migration in this period,

um, is like, weirdly more relevant than ever, as we're already seeing.

The history of Britain is one of constant entry by different groups, its language and its cultures, all to use a slightly worn out metaphor.

A melting pot of influences and Greens idea of Englishness is very selective and artificial meets a certain kind of ideological outlook.

Rawls is an historical work. To this very day.

The term Anglo Saxon carries a heavy burden of political meaning.

On the bottom on the right hand side of the slide. I've got a couple of examples for you.

Let's start with this one. We've got a recent ish quotation from the document produced by the right wing organisation America First.

And it suggests that America is the inheritor of Anglo-Saxon traditions, but it is not at all clear what these might be.

In fact, the history of, say, if they're thinking about parliamentary structures which are often credited to Britain,

the development of parliamentary structures across the world naturally carries the imprints of the sort of colonialist outpouring,

um, of British parliamentary culture, and yet was also in different nations,

conducted in a way that acculturated various indigenous parliamentary traditions to right.

This gives no nuance to any idea of what Anglo-Saxon values might be.

What is clear is that the text is hostile to the entrance into America of other global cultural traditions.

Um, at the bottom. I only became aware of this quote the other day.

Uh, Donald Trump is a mythic figure, almost like the various Scandinavian bear wolves and other kinds of sagas.

I'm quite sure what Beowulf is in the plural there. There's really just the one text,

but I'm attributing the former speaker of the U.S. House of Representatives with some knowledge, which is probably my mistake.

So, um, this is the kind of stuff we're dealing with, and it is fascinating, uh, you know,

the history of the use and abuse and re-use of medieval history to work through modern problems is a rich history we're already seeing.

It goes back to the 1800s, really kind of begins with Henry the Eighth,

dissolution of the monasteries and looking back into documentary evidence for an English church.

Um, and you can explore this stuff in your work, by the way,

you have to write about old English for this paper, and you have to write about it on its own terms.

But you can absolutely be thinking about how that was received, used, reworked in later periods.

Uh, which is not all it's not all bad news. It's not all this doom and gloom. We have some wonderful writers who loved old English.

James Joyce was an enormous fan of Beowulf, for example.

Um, but because of what we're dealing with here, some scholars are now using the term early medieval England instead of Anglo-Saxon.

Um, that's because Anglo-Saxon has become associated through this with a sort of Wasp identity in America, the white Anglo-Saxon,

Protestant Anglo-Saxon has come sometimes to be synonymous for whiteness in certain cultures, probably more so in the United States than here.

But, you know, these ideas have good currency.

You're going to encounter both of these times in your books and lectures.

Um, and yeah, my personal opinion is that you mustn't worry about which you use in your writing.

Right. Um, it it's good to be aware of the problematic context for this term, but your tutors,

your examiners are not going to mind at all if you're using Anglo-Saxon. We're fully aware that really before 2015, that was the terminology.

And that's a lot of what you're going to be reading. Okay.

So you know, but you don't need to stress uh, across these lectures we're going to see that the early medieval English,

we're not remotely an isolated people concerned simply with their own cultural supremacy.

And they were proud, uh, but they were hungry for imported knowledge, imported culture and imports of material goods.

They lived on a small island at the very edge of their known world,

and they were constantly looking backwards back towards the North European regions from which their ancestors had come back towards Rome,

which held ancient political authority back, back even further to the Middle East,

to Jerusalem, which was the spiritual centre of the Christian world.

The story of early English history and early English literature is in part the story of

migrants who were as interested in where they had come from as what they were going.

So here we have a really interesting map. This is an 11th century map mundi 11th century ten hundreds.

So quite late in our period. That's fine. Mappa mundi is just some ostentatious Latin meaning map of the world.

So that is the whole world. Um, where is Britain?

Okay, let's find out. Take a minute to make your guess if you like, I a few of you have seen this.

Britain is down in the bottom left hand corner.

It's not in the middle. It's not even oriented in the direction that we would generally expect it to be now.

Um, and that is because in the period. East was the direction that you have maps facing upwards towards,

because that was the holy direction to pointed towards the Middle East, towards Jerusalem, the centre of the conceived religious world.

Okay. Uh, you can kind of make it out. We got islands coming up over the Orkneys, a little scattered islands.

We've got Ireland, which does seem to have been turned on its sides, or to anyone from Ireland.

They have really butchered your island.

Um, and then we've got the kind of curve of England, uh, with, with Cornwall sort of pointing down towards the bottom.

So these migrants Germanic tribes arrived in Britain from the fifth century onwards, the four hundreds.

And they brought with them their own literature, their own stories, many of which celebrated great leaders and heroes of the past.

They were pagan at this point, and their ability to write down text was actually fairly limited because the alphabet they used was the runic alphabet.

Okay, this is what we got on this slide. You might have encountered runes before.

They're often treated like mystical objects in popular culture.

You might find some in the spirituality section of Waterstones, but in truth they are just a writing system.

As you can see from the image of the slides, they're pretty angular in form, and that's because they're made to be carved onto wood, stone, bone.

They're not designed to be written on ink or paper or parchment.

And because because they're for carving. This is in part why we don't get big long text surviving in runes.

It's much more effort to carve onto stone, as here.

Um, and if you would carve a quick message onto wood that's going to biodegrade.

So we do have some survivals, but they're much rarer.

The image on the right here is a Scandinavian runestone, 11th century, much later.

Just to give you an idea of how runes might have been used.

So, because the Germanic settlers didn't write books,

their stories would generally have been passed on orally, which means by recitation or by telling aloud.

Many of these stories survived for so long that centuries later they were adopted and written down as Old English poetry.

So I'm going to tell you about one such story of a hero,

which appears to have been popular in England because his name appears in several Old English texts, and this is the story of Wayland the Smith.

When it was a famous blacksmith in Germanic legend, uh, in an Old Norse poem, Wayland is captured by a lord called neat.

Hard and he's hard cuts. Wayland hamstrings ouch to stop him escaping and makes him work in his forge.

In revenge, Wayland murders Knight, hides two sons, and makes drinking cups out of their skulls.

He uses these cups to give drugged beer to neat Todd's daughter, Badger Hild, who he sexually assaults, and she becomes pregnant from the encounter.

Finally, Weiland escapes using wings made from the feathers of birds.

It's fairly miserable story appears in one of our very earliest witnesses of Old English poetry.

Uh, but it's not a book. It's a box. The Franks Casket is a box made from whalebone, manufactured sometime in the eighth century.

It's like life. Passage is wild. It was discovered broken up, being partially used as a sewing box in France during the 20th century.

And you can go see it at the British Museum. Um. And it's not even stolen.

So it's a win win situation, really.

Um, each of the sides of this box show a different story from Germanic legend, classical myth, or Christian history.

And on this slide, I've given you the panel that has the story of Wayland the Smith is the male figure to the far left.

Um, he is holding a cup in one hand, and you can perhaps just make out.

It's not very clear, but there is a decapitated body lying on the floor at his feet, his passing the cut to a woman who is presumably Badoo held.

On the far right hand side of the panel, we can see a man strangling geese.

And these are the geese whose feathers will allow violence to fly to freedom.

This is a very typical sort of representation, really, across the Middle Ages of a story being told.

Only this kind of comic book strip, kind of like, but not necessarily with dividers.

We are moving in time across the image.

And it does interest me that the woman bout a hill is at the centre of this image, despite her utterly demeaned position in this story.

Indeed, the other panels on the box suggest a particular kind of interest in women by the creator of the Franks Casket.

There is also an Old English poem which pays attention to the plight of fairies held.

And this is the poem day on which is copied into the extra book,

a manuscript copied during the 10th century, but full of poems composed perhaps centuries earlier.

So I'll read a little bit of this for you. Wayland him.

They were man. They couldn't. Not a man who took ill a further drag after him to assist the sewer and long ass went to jail.

They h when oft on fond cysts on he and a nice hard on near the lake.

The swamp carousel on a bend on sill and morn.

Thus Ofori-Atta. This is sua my.

Beata Hilda Ney was head of Barossa darce on safe and soil.

SA swineherd a sulphur thing. That's. Hey! Oh yeah.

Don't eat your own yet and have to that tale I can was a after sarasti you think on who am that shareholder thus oh for the older this is sua my.

Wayland endured suffering. The single minded man suffered hardships.

He had sorrow and longing as his companions.

Winter cold exile always received woe, since knit hard had placed constrictions on him.

Secret sinew bands on the better man that passed away.

So to me this.

But I was not so sorry for the death of her brothers, as she was for her own predicament, that she clearly understood that she was with child.

Afterwards, she could not presumptuously think how to deal with that that passed away.

So to make this. Enjoy all of the speakers, remembering the miseries of ancient figures like Wayland and Bauder Hills,

and we find out at the end of the poem that this is in order to comfort himself about his own miseries.

So early schadenfreude. The idea is that of other people's past misery over Ota passed away, literally over Roda, over road, road over passed away.

Then this present misery meeting. Notice that the poem doesn't really bother to explain who Weyland and Hilde are.

It's assumed that the audience know. And you're listening to it. No, because I have just told you.

And it's interesting to think about what that means for audiences.

Is it that these stories were so common that they always passed around and they were in the aether?

Is there an exclusionary reflex in which communities are created?

If people in the know and people not in the know?

I think this becomes particularly interesting in Beowulf, which begins by saying, listen, we have heard the stories.

Who is we? Have we really? Better story follows that of Wayland, but her anguish is given the same structure and amount of space in the text.

Other references to Wayland and Old English poetry are concerned primarily with his legendary skill as a smith in Beowulf,

and and this is passage five on your handout,

the hero claims to be protected by armour crafted by Wayland, while in the poem will vary, the power of a sword forged by Wayland is celebrated.

The early medieval English even named a Neolithic borough over Wayland,

which is a short walk from Oxford, saying you could go and have a look at Waynesboro.

The point is, it clearly becomes a shorthand for saying something about smithing prowess, so it must have been pretty commonly known as a story.

Final reference to Wayland. Uh. Okay, fine.

I don't think I realise I dislike this. Great. So this is the book which I was reading from before, um,

that has the story of Wayland and be able to build, uh, with that refrain that's, oh, foot odour.

This is why my it's laid out with these beautiful large characters introducing each new story of misery.

And this is extremely unusual for Old English poetic layout.

It's not normally arranged, um, frankly, and so clear away.

So there's been a lot of love and care gone into the transcription of this poem.

Uh, a lot of the stuff that you read will come from the extra book.

You're probably going, well, if you keep coming to these lectures, which you absolutely should, you'll look at the Wanderer we have Day or Seafarer.

Um, it's a massive, enigmatic manuscript, and people scholars are still debating, um,

exactly how it was created and why it contains the strange admixture of poetry that it does.

So a final reference to Wayland pops up in a later text.

This is an Old English translation of a Latin Christian text, The Constellation of Philosophy, by bioethicists.

This is going to be a common theme not only in the early medieval period, but across your degree, actually.

Um, that a lot of the literature that we will handle on translations and adaptations of texts from other cultures and other languages,

particularly from Latin, actually. So I've given a brief account of hubo.

Bioethicist is on the slide. He was a Roman statesman of the fifth or sixth centuries.

Uh, he wrote a powerful philosophical text on fate, freewill, the transience of life and justice.

This text was so influential that it remained read throughout the medieval period, um, beyond and in early medieval England.

It was translated into Old English, possibly by King Alfred in the original Latin text,

but weakest point out how transient the glories of life are by pointing to those once famous and powerful Romans who are now dead.

Okay. And he writes, uh. There we go.

Yeah, sure. He writes death lumps together, lowly and high.

Born as one. She ranks the highest with the base.

Where are the bones of trusty Fabricius now? Gone.

Brutus. Stern. Cato. Have no place.

Don't know if you know who Fabricius is. Brutus. Cato.

His name's might ping something in your memory. They might? Absolutely not.

I think for most people, no, they absolutely would not.

And the old English translator was also clearly concerned that their audience would not know who Fabricius, Brutus and Cato were.

So he decided to use a name that they would recognise.

The Old English translation reads. Thus when now all the wise one Wayland bones the worker in gold, once greatest in glory.

I ask where the bones of Wayland are buried.

Whelan's faded glory is compared in both.

This is text with the eternal virtue of Christ, and this translation of The Consolation of Philosophy was produced during the reign of King Alfred.

During the ninth century, and long after the migrations were complete.

The English was thoroughly Christianised by this point and more sceptical about the pagan past.

So Wayland is a fitting choice of person to contrast with Christian permanence,

and this little episode shows us that translation is something that we can always

investigate with an eye to what changes have been made when we look at translated texts.

It's interesting both to see what is maintained, you know, what was felt to be important from the past,

but also where changes are made by translators, because those often point most cleanly to what their key concerns are.

So the Germanic settlers brought with them a very different approach to societal organisation than had existed in Roman Britain.

Order was no longer assured by legal administrative institutions which focussed on the individual,

and instead kinship became the major way in which people related to one another.

Kings controlled war bands, and in return for the war bands loyalty, the king would give them treasure.

But to get treasure, to give them, he needed plunder, so that war bands needed constant conflicts in order to generate wealth.

And for this reason, kings often referred to an Old English poetry as ring givers or gold friends, which definitely sounded better in Old English.

And it doesn't modern English. Fine. Bacchae for gold winner.

There is, in every clause a gold ring. There's always somebody who has like paracetamol in their bag or whatever when you need it.

So please identify who that is in your cohort. Um, order was maintained through the threat of feuding between different kin groups.

So you didn't want to wantonly attack your neighbours without being assured of success because they'd come back and attack you, right?

And a text like Beowulf can be read as a societal critique of the way that food and culture, despite being the honourable thing that one has to do,

ultimately utterly decimate societies and particularly the weakest people in society,

the most disenfranchised people who in Beowulf are generally represented by women of any class.

Indeed, the model of kingship is front and centre in Beowulf.

And I'm going to read to you from the beginning of the poem, laying out the story of shield shaping who is a good king.

And this should be. This is on your handouts, probably number nine or thereabouts.

Yes, we have heard of the greatness of the spear Dane's high days, in days long past.

How those nobles practised bravery. Often called son of chef, expelled opponents, hosts.

Many people from meat seats made men fear him.

After he was first discovered destitute, he lived, uh to missing a page.

What did he live to do? He lived to see remedy for that. Grew up under the heavens, prospered in marks of distinction.

Until every neighbour across the well rise. Had to answer to him.

Pay tribute. That was a good cake.

Counterintuitive to us now. Perhaps. Perhaps not.

But the ability to subjugate other people and obtain their wealth was a necessity in the economy of plunder,

honour and loyalty prevalent in the early English kingdoms. And like it's worth remembering that this is not unique against the early medieval period.

We might think about the, um, you know, the period of conquest and expansionism after the discovery of these so-called New World and trade routes.

Um, we can find this kind of economy happening in different forms later in our studies.

Uh, it's not particularly sustainable, though, is it?

If you need to get your wealth by going out and robbing from other people, that's a never ending kind of cycle.

So you can see how the feuding eventually becomes inevitable. The violence is cyclical.

It does not end. And this is a concern that we find coming up in our poetry and prose again and again.

The Christian conversion. Okay.

When the Anglo-Saxons arrived in Britain in the fifth century, they subscribed to a pagan belief system, and they imported that with them.

We have clues about it, but we don't have a lot of detail because, as aforementioned, they did not write books.

By the end of the seventh century, they were very much part of the Christian world.

Christianity came to medieval England from two directions, from Irish missionaries in the north.

The Monastery of Iona was founded in the year five, six, three,

but also from Roman missionaries in the south, who arrived in the year five, nine, seven.

Let's start with Iona. Saint Columba travelled from Ireland to establish a monastery in Iona.

Um, and there was another uh monastery established at Lindisfarne.

Anybody ever visited Lindisfarne or Iona? I have not made it to my own yet, but Lindisfarne is an amazing visit to completely recommend.

Um. Early Irish monks really idealised the figure of the hermit.

Someone who cut themselves off in exile from society to live alone and contemplate God.

And you might experience during your degree at least, a kind of secular version of that.

Cutting yourself off and contemplating literature. Get together and contemplate together to whatever makes you happy.

On the slide is an extract from a ninth century Irish poem celebrating a life of hermitage and translated into modern English.

So I'll read a bit of this to you. All alone in my little cell without a single human being along with me.

Such a pilgrimage would be dear to my heart before going to meet death.

A hidden, secluded hut for forgiveness of all evil.

A conscience unconverted and troubled, directed toward holy heaven.

So this is this is an Irish poem. And as this sort of centre of your writing for exams, you'll need to focus on English.

But you can absolutely be bringing in references to relevant contemporary literature

like this in other languages to support your studies in Old English texts.

This kind of isolation described in this poem is an aspect of something called a citizen.

This means a form of rigorous self-discipline and self-denial.

And I'm going to spell it because why should anyone here hotspots a s c e t I c I s.

Self-discipline, self-denial. Practices of hermitage.

I'm so sorry. Like, um, my brain was just like, you guys call it raw dogging, right?

Like that's what it sees as a mess. Okay? I'm never going to say it again.

Don't worry.

Practices of Hermitage originated in the Middle East among the Desert Fathers, and were transmitted to Ireland in the fifth and sixth centuries.

And they totally knew that this originated in does.

It's far away the knowledge of where the Middle East was, and what it really looked like was quite limited,

but they were trying to emulate these often Syriac Church fathers who had gone into a life of a sea system in the desert.

Now notice how the Irish poet describes this monastic solitude as a pilgrimage.

You may or may not know much about pilgrimage, but the word is probably at least somewhat familiar,

and you might think about pilgrimage as a physical journey.

Various religions encourage practitioners to undertake spiritual journeys.

Christians across the world still travel to sites like Jerusalem or Santiago de Compostela, or indeed Canterbury.

Muslims travel to Mecca. Hindus travel to sites on the river Ganges, but in this poem the journey or pilgrimage is of a different nature.

It does not involve physical movement to another place.

It is a pilgrimage of the soul towards God and of the self towards death, and therefore a return to God.

And if you're interested in that idea, sort of temporarily, um,

there's some really interesting literature of the 20th century in a tradition broadly associated with psycho geography,

um, about sort of meeting of movements and mentality.

And there is some really good stuff about people sort of taking journeys while just sat in their own chairs, utilising maps in weird ways.

Um, this idea of life as pilgrimage is a powerful feature of Western Christianity in general.

The idea that your whole life is a form of exile, uh, in which you are moving slowly back home towards heaven.

It's expressed by the early Christian thinker Augustine in his work called On Christian Teaching.

And this is on your handouts. How would it be if we were travellers abroad who were not able to live happily unless in our homelands?

And in any case, we're feeling miserable through travel and desiring to end our journey.

We might desire to return to our homelands, but if the pleasantness of the journey and the conveyance of the vehicles themselves delight us.

Then if we convert that which we ought to use into what is to be enjoyed, we are unwilling to quickly finish the course.

Corrupted and embraced by sweetness. We are alienated from the homeland whose sweetness would make us truly happy.

So it is in this mortal life wandering away from God.

To the Christian spiritual traveller,

the world is both a means to reach heaven and a potentially dangerous distraction from the virtue required to get there.

The hermitage of the Irish monk allows him to focus his mind entirely on God, and God is the only visitor that he desires.

You might like to think about this idea of holy isolation when you come to look at old English texts like The Wanderer,

which we'll discuss next week, or The Wife's Lament.

In the north of England, the spread of Christianity was accompanied by a tradition of stone preaching crosses.

I'm not going to be able to open this, but it is going to be on the slides that go up on canvas art.

And I fully recommend that this is a 3D model of what I'm preaching. Cross I'll explain.

So one such cross which survives of the present day is the Roswell cross.

It was produced in the eighth century. It's like about yay high, yay wide.

Um, it's covered in images of biblical stories and religious quotations in Latin.

And it survived in a churchyard in Dumfriesshire. It's now inside the church there.

Uh, and most excitingly, there are runes down the side of the cross which carries snippets of Old English poetry.

They correspond with a poem called The Dream of the roots, written down much later in the 10th century for Charlie book.

So cross bits of poetry and runes two centuries later.

Book. Longer version of apparently same poem, but written in the Roman alphabet in a book.

This tells us something about, presumably the popularity of this particular bit of text, whether or not it was expanded,

or whether the cross just had extracts, and certainly about dissemination and the fact that things are being passed on.

It had evidently circulated for hundreds of years in some form or another.

The cult of the cross was powerful in eighth century England.

Uh, what do I mean by cult? Okay, uh, I do and don't mean cult in the way that we might think of it now.

Um, we refer to things in Christian history, like the cult of saints,

and this meant the practices of veneration around an important religious figure, prophets, etcetera.

It is then where we come to ideas of cults now. Um, but didn't have that kind of pejorative sense.

On the contrary, the cult of saints was very much like a part of your pious religious life.

Uh, somebody who lived, um, in the medieval period.

So I'm going to read to you is one of, uh, sort of final bits and pieces,

the opening of The Dream of the roots, this poem about a cross, uh, which we find in part inscribed on a cross.

Okay. Caught it swift and it set. John will write to me, to you, to to middle and to South Sunday woods.

But ends at us the wounded on that it she saw a Cilic had a trail on left led and a wound and bam a

bell tossed away all that's back and was begotten mid gold a Jim stored on fire that followed him.

Shed some, switched to that fifth word on upper on them.

Actually Chapin beheld in that angle Driftless ala fiery third fourth.

Your shaft name was that hoodoo goddess Yaga.

Uh there beheld and heilig aghast. Us men offered Molson owned ales, ales made a shaft switch was given on each.

Send them far forward. Wounded middle woman.

Listen, I will tell the best decisions that came to me in the middle of the night when voice bearers dwelled in rest.

It seemed to me that I saw a more wonderful tree lifted in the air, wound round with light, the brightest of beams.

That beacon was entirely cased in gold. Beautiful gems stood at the corners of the earth.

Likewise there were five upon the cross beam. All those further through creation gazed on the angel of the Lord there.

There was certainly no gallows of the wicked. But Holy Spirit's beheld at that man over the earth, and all this glorious creation.

Wondrous was the victory tree. And I stained with sins.

Wounded with guilt. This poem belongs to a kind of genre that we call the dream vision, which again,

it's very much something that you'll see play out across long histories of literature.

Um, far before English literature was a tradition.

Um, and presumably long after it dies. And it begins with a person who is completely alone, isolated by the night time when other people are asleep.

Note that the compound word rewards end and line two speech barriers is used to represent these other sleeping people.

It seems as though the silence of human voices is the necessary precursor to the speaker's amazing vision.

The cross which he sees is beautifully ornamented, much like the cross, which Constantine orders to be made after his own vision, looking up at him.

But its beauty prompts introspection from the dreamer.

In the penultimate line of this extract, Sewall, which was to seek a balm on each synonym for got that alliteration?

Siga balm. Victory beam. Synonym is sin.

This is an example of that tension that we get across a line, the gloriousness of the cross, contrasted with the dreamers sinful state.

Okay, so we have Germanic tribes who arrive as pagans.

They settle. They probably don't murder everyone. They probably met as some people, and then they all converted to Christianity,

in part by forces from the north of England that are interested in hermitage and isolation.

Um, and you use preaching crosses to talk to them, but also in part from the south by Roman missionaries.

So this was the second wave of missionary activity to arrive, um, Pope Gregory the Great, Pope from the year 590 to his death in 604,

was inspired to send missionaries to the English after seeing some young boys for sale at a market.

Uh, and I've put an extra to that effect on your handout, so won't read now.

But Gregory sent a Roman monk by the name of Augustine, not the big famous Augustine, who you may well have heard of.

Um, but a different Augustine. He landed in what is now in the year five, nine, seven,

and the spot where he supposedly landed is now marked with a commemorative stone cross produced and erected in the Victorian period,

probably as part of that veneration of Anglo Saxon culture, which we were thinking about at the start of the lecture.

Gregory. Saint Augustine. Some instructions by letter. Um, this is on your handout and I'll read the italicised section.

Gregory says, I've long been considering with myself about the case of the Angley,

that the temples of idols and that nation should not be destroyed, but that the idols themselves that are in them should be.

Let blessed water be prepared and sprinkled in these temples and altars constructed and relics deposited.

Since if these same temples are well built, it is needful that they should be transferred from the worship of idols to the service of the true God,

so that when the people themselves see that these temples are not destroyed,

they may put away error from their heart,

and knowing and adoring the true God may have recourse with the more familiarity to the places that they have been accustomed to.

So the aim is not to replace native culture and beliefs in their entirety, but to convert familiar structures to the service of a new Christian order.

A sin criticism, a meeting of different cultures, and an amalgamation that Gregory hopes will lead the people of England into the Christian faith.

Got an example of this principle in action on the slide. This was a tweet that was recent at one point.

Um. Uh, what do we call them now anyway?

What are they? They're not tweets. I don't care about a preaching cross made out of stone from a pagan altar.

So this is the repurposing of a stone from a pagan structure into a piece of church architecture.

And we see this. So we see this conceptually in what they want to put in temples.

We see it architecturally and how they're building the structures. And we see it textually in their re-use of stories.

Augustine arrives in England. He meets with King Albert of Kent, and the Kentish people were quite cosmopolitan for their day.

They had links with the Franks, who just lived across the channel, and King Albert had married a Frankish princess called Bertha, who was a Christian.

So Augustine managed to persuade Albert's convert before he died,

and a Christian centre was established at Canterbury, which remains an important Christian site to the present day.

And you can visit the ruins of Saint Augustine's Abbey in Canterbury.

It's very beautiful. In the space of about 90 years, the English had by and large converted to the Christian faith.

So basically they were all Christian by about the year 690.

