[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
Okay, guys. Oh, that's louder than normal. Uh, welcome back for fourth week.

Um, I promised last time that just in case anyone is still a little confused that I would show you where

to get a handout so that you can follow along or download them after or whatever works for you.

So on canvas, you will have, um, this bar on the left hand side.

And under that you're going to click on courses and under quizzes.

You just want to go straight to the Faculty of English Language and Literature on that page.

When you scroll down you will find a section dedicated to prelims.

Uh, and each prelim section has a paper. And we have quiz here today or paper too.

Early medieval literature 650 to 1350.

If you click on that, you'll come to this page. Uh, well, it will flick you down to the right bit of this page.

And here are listed all of the lectures that are happening, um, this term underneath this paper.

And then to get the handouts for my lectures, you obviously just click on the one with my name and you can download the handouts week on week.

So Faculty of English languages, it's just, um, two prelims paper to choose your specific lecture.

And then you can download the handout for that week. So I will let you go ahead and do that.

So we may be having a switcheroo machine partway through this lecture, but that will be fine.

So. All right.

Welcome to the final lecture in the Old English Lit in Context series.

If you've been attending all the way through. Congratulations.

Um, and of course, the lectures online, if there's any of those that you weren't able to make.

Uh, in any case, I hope you're looking forward to the set text lectures, which will start from next week.

Those will be super useful for the work that you're going to be doing towards your prelims exams.

Um, and those will be given, I believe, by Doctor Helen Appleton.

So quick recap. Uh, last week we entered the 10th century.

We learned about the consolidation of territorial power enacted by the descendants of Alfred the Great,

as well as the great burgeoning of intellectual and spiritual activity generated by the period now known as the Benedictine reform period.

And this week, we're going to be thinking about the period up to around 1100.

So right to the end of what is often called the Anglo-Saxon period, not to the end of what you can cover on this paper,

but a big major turning points, um, disease, the decline of the Germanic English kingdom and the eventual rise,

first of a Danish king and then the Norman conquest of 1066,

and will encounter poems written in Old English that variously celebrate the heroism and bewail the fate of this turbulent period.

Um, and you might say, why up to 1100 if it all ends in 1066?

But of course, people don't stop speaking or writing in the language that they have overnight.

Old English continues to be written, uh, and used for some time after the conquest,

but under the influence of the new Norman language of this elite class who have come in through invasion,

the language does begin to change towards early Middle English and begins its train of working towards what we now speak today.

Um, content note uh, we'll be discussing ethnic violence and massacre in the period,

and there's going to be an image of an archaeological site containing human bones.

Okay, so this is where we left off last week with manuscripts.

Um, and just as a little salutary reminder, the text that you're doing this year,

all bar one of them bottle of Maldon, which we no longer have the manuscript for because fire happens.

Um, our other three sets survive.

And these three manuscripts all produced in sort of either the late 10th or the early 11th century.

The poems themselves, uh, are much, much older, but they have been copied down at this later period.

And that kind of invites us to reflect not only on the conditions of composition.

You know why? In the seventh century, shortly after the conversion, someone is interested in writing a poem like Beowulf,

but actually why somebody is interested in copying out a poem like Beowulf?

No small feat. Um, in the late tens or early 11th century, we have composition context and we have continuing reception contexts.

Um, it's a great thing to point out, however briefly in your writing, that you understand this distance in time.

You're not just dropping the name Beowulf into your essay.

You're saying Beowulf, a poem probably written in around the seventh century but preserved in the Noble Codex of the 10th to early 11th century.

And this gives an immediate sense of range and understanding, and helps you set the foundations for how you're going to approach that text.

Excellent. Okay.

Um, an important figure of the Benedictine reform who we didn't get on to discussing last week is a guy called Ulrich, of him.

Ulrich, uh, as we got on the slide, born in the 1950s and died in ten, ten.

So, um, quite late in that century is the period he's writing.

And he was educated by one of the big movers and shakers of the Benedictine reform, a man called Bishop Athol Wald.

Ulrich himself was a prolific writer of Old English first, uh, saints lives, uh,

one of the kind of genres that you might be likely to come across the Alfred jazz written, but he also wrote a great many homilies.

He writes a book of grammar. He was a teacher, he was a monastic, and he was a teacher.

And a lot of his writings, in fact, really all of his writings that you might look at,

you can see the reflexes of the fact that he wanted to help people of all ages and

various groups in society understands not only things like how to use language,

how to read, uh, but actually how to understand scripture, how to understand theological truths.

So his saints lives in his homilies are marked by exemplar that people might find simple to follow and explanations to help them live good lives.

Um, one of the lives that is particularly interesting, and I'm simply going to recommend you, uh, to read, is The Life of Saint Eugenia.

Um, this is a saintly figure who has often been called, uh, the transgender saint or the cross-dressing saints.

Transgender and cross-dressing are not the same thing. So let's get into briefly, um, why we would have those two nomenclatures.

Uh, the story of Saint Eugenia is of a young woman who was born to an aristocratic family who persecuted Christians.

She herself becomes Christian, uh,

and dresses as a man in order to run away and live in a male monastery where she can be safe from the persecution and follow her religious beliefs.

Um. God has approved this. She lives with two eunuchs and the local bishop has realised and also approves.

So there is this circle of safety drawn around her.

This is not a pure tale of empowerment to go gender swapping from our sort of late antique early medieval period.

It's a bit more circumscribed than that. But nonetheless, she does rise to become the leader of this male monastery under the guise of being a man.

Ultimately, one day she is accused of sexual assault by a woman, uh, and in a bid to demonstrate that she could not have perpetrated this,

she exposes her breast, uh, to the judge, who happens to be her father.

Um, and mass conversions follow. Uh, yes. Yes.

The family dynamics in this story are extremely weird. Um, the cross-dressing aspect, I suppose, is reasonably care just from the storyline.

However, the idea of transgenderism is something that can also emerge from a close reading.

There was a particular line in all French's text that speaks about Eugenia becoming a man in her mind.

We do have that female pronoun here. Um, and this taps into a wider theological notion that we find in the writings of early Church Fathers,

particularly Saint Jerome, about the desirability of women transcending their nature to become more like men.

So we can look at this with an eye to an interest in queer readings,

and we can do that while also keeping one foot in an understanding of the distinctive gender politics of the period that was inherited,

uh, from religious doctrine. Okay, so that's the end of our Benedictine reform period.

But here is a king who is deeply and acted in it. So last week we learned that, uh, the during the 10th century, the West Saxon kings,

the descendants of King Alfred's, came to assume rule over all of England as well as parts of Scotland and Wales.

We had that poem, The Battle of Britain, celebrating the incursion into more distant regions of the island,

and the West Saxon kings begin to think of themselves as emperors of Britain, as kings of kings.

We might remember that the previously dominant state of Mercia became a sub state under Alfred's expanded Wessex,

with its own sort of sub king and eventually sub queen in the form of the blood of Mercia.

So this idea of hierarchies, of kingship, of being a king of kings, was something that had developed over time.

We learnt about the Benedictine reform, which, just to recap,

was an overhaul of the monastic system predicated upon a strict application of the Rule of Saint Benedict.

The Rule of Saint Benedict was a manual about how to live a good monastic life.

Uh, and the Benedictine reforms sought to professionalise the monasteries through this important document.

Reform also encouraged a great flourishing of literary output, primarily through monastic avenues.

The Benedictine reform was reliant upon the supports of the aristocracy, and King Edgar,

who reigned over the English from 959 to his death in 975, was a great supporter of the reform.

Edgar is often given the opposite to the peaceful. But this is a bit of a misnomer.

Pacifist is the Latin word. Uh. So Edward the peaceful.

Edward. Pacifist. Um, it should probably really be interpreted as peacemaker rather than peaceful.

It's been hypothesised that Edgar achieved peace in England during his reign,

through strict military control and a display of violence that was offputting to Viking raiders.

So ensuring a sort of peace and stability through acts of violence.

Certain kind of tension. Uh, no Viking activity is recorded in England during his reign,

and it's important to think about how the threat of incursion affects literary output rights when we have the Vikings invading before Alfred's reign.

It's a period where we don't get a lot of manuscripts surviving.

It's not a great period of literary production because people had other things on their mind, like running away, um, or just being slaughtered.

So there are two short poems in the Chronicle commemorating important events in Edgar's reign.

His coronation at bath in 1973 and his death in 1975.

And I've got the latter on your handout.

I know it says nine, seven three.

We often have these gaps of dating issue, um, in the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle, which, if we remember, is our historical record of events.

Um, done year by year. So I'll read the the poem on the coronation of Edgar, first in Old English and then in translation.

And this is number one on the hunter head.

Edgar was Anglo wild. And cougars are a mixture to Kooning.

A whole gorge on that eld and booted uh, at Comanche yesterday at Chez U-bend, Austria were the bareness bars and numbnuts.

That was bliss Mitchell on them, adding di uh a Alamy award a dun dun a Neath the bale numbnuts on cheek at

Pentecost nesday that was proposed to Hap Mitchell Munich as riots mean a affray.

Uh throughout your day rolled onto that Igangan was 200 hour winter.

Your melodramas from your Bertie to Bram as cunning as Leo the herd as put on there to laugh.

Thy yarn was winter. You tell us. That's the uri to set.

Just say phone on 20 soir now was of Ray and thousand out in dada this year lampooned him.

I had Monday's effort. I have to sneak on on 20 this where jihad winter on World road.

Uh uh. This year warden was on that um strict.

He was they and. Yeah. How good. Okay in translation here.

Edgar, ruler of the angles, was consecrated as king with great ceremony in the ancient city of Manchester, whose inhabitants now call bath.

There was great happiness descended on all that joyous day that men below call Pentecost.

Pentecost is an important Christian festival.

There was a great gathering of priests, a multitude of monks, as I have had tell assembled in council.

And that was 1000 winters from the birth of that famous king, Guardian of light.

He's talking about Christ, save that that was remaining, as the writers say,

20 and seven winters so near had the run of the Lord of victories come to a thousand.

When this befell and Edmunds er had seen in the world for 29 winters when this came to pass, and then on the 30th he was consecrated as Lord.

All right, let's dive into this pub a bit and think about what it's doing, how it's styled, what it means.

Uh, this short poem contains several features of traditional Germanic verse,

which are still in use here to celebrate the coronation of a Christian monarch.

Okay, we have this expression. Meaning you, Freya.

Um, as I have heard tell, we find this in Beowulf.

Fits a sort of narrative formula. It reminds you that this is being relayed by someone's voice.

We have the words wold and ruler for Edgar Segal to fray and, uh, Lord of, uh, victory for Christ.

Instead of a multitude of thanes and warriors, however, which we might expect in a poem like Beowulf.

Here we have multitudes of priests and monks. Uh, Piraeus.

The harp, uh, multitude of priests.

The word harp means multitude or group, and it does turn into the modern English word heap.

It's exactly the same spelling, same word, slightly shift in semantics.

Uh, and it's a word that is often used to describe armies. So Hibbing used to describe priests.

The parallel is absolutely that these are the warriors and saints of.

Uh, it's basically a continuation of the Alfred and Christianisation of Germanic kingship, which begins back at the conversion.

So the syncretic meeting of traditional Germanic diction and ideas, uh, with Christian ideas of kingship and rulership.

We have some other points of continuity. Uh, the poem is interested in the past.

So the coronation site happens in the Roman city of bath.

Establishing that idea of continuity with Roman Britain and therefore sort of leeching off Roman imperial glory.

There's a lot of numbers in this poem. You might have heard me say seven on 2027.

Great. We also have 3030. Uh, basically, the poem is measuring the date of this event in the time it has been since Christ's birth.

So nearly 1000 years. Not quite the like it was a thousand years.

-27. Close enough, this clearly felt, to have some significance that they're coming up on the millennium.

And we also here at its age as well.

Um, and Edgar's kingship is being presented through this kind of technique as an earthly reflection on the eternal kingship of Christ.

So continuation of the power of Christ, the authority of Rome and the rulership of the West Saxons, um,

are all prominent in this poem, and it was composed during the reign of Asil Rhodes, Edgar's son and successor.

So we have this putting in place of the constant memory of the Wessex kings of the present and the past.

As you can see from this handy timeline for which you're very welcome.

Uh, the kingship of England gets pretty hectic from the end of Edgar's reign, and in particular,

we have movement between the rulership of the West Saxon kings and the Danes.

And you absolutely do not need to memorise this information or, uh, know it in detail.

Um, it is simply very helpful to you to understand how fraught the situation was across these

decades and how strong the threats posed by the Danish to the West Saxon kingship was.

Edgar, whose reign had been peaceable, in fact had several sons by different women, which can cause problems.

Um, definitely brought complication intention to the succession to his kingship.

When he died, his son Edward the Martyr took the throne upon Edgar's death in 1975,

but he was murdered some three years later by supporters of one of Edgar's other sons afterwards.

Arthur then became the king himself, aged only 12.

So you may have heard of. Also read the second.

He's often known as Athol Reds the Unready, and he ruled over early medieval England during the critical period of decline for the House of Wessex.

He ruled from nine seven 8 to 1016, with a brief interregnum of a couple of years, when he was forced into exile by Sweyn Falk Beard,

a man with an excellent name, who we will talk about in a few minutes afterwards, had taken the throne in difficult circumstances.

Right. The sudden death of his father, King Edgar, in 1975, his elder brothers election at King,

but subsequent murder at hustle, Richard's own estate at Corfe Castle.

Of course, the young ruler, 12 years old, had little real power and was compelled to rely upon the counsel of his witan,

which is the name for the group of councillors and his elder men, many of whom, as we shall see, were not the most reliable types.

Um. And unsurprisingly, he struggles to deal with the Viking threats which was being renewed.

And people often assume that he's dubbed Ethelred the Unready because he wasn't ready to deal with the threat.

That's probably true, but actually, in Old English, his name and epithet is Assal rud un rod, and it's something of a pun.

Many early medieval names are compounds, so Ethelred itself, Atholl means noble and rod means counsel or advice.

So Ethelred is full name, means sort of noble council, um, or could be read as nobly.

Councils be about the council he gives Atholl rad un rod therefore means noble advice, the ill advised.

It's just sort of. It's hilarious. It's really funny.

Yeah. Yeah. Great. Um, and it probably reflects the idea that he was poorly served by his advisers rather than reflecting on his personal failings.

When Arthur Read was in his 20s. The East Saxons, who were part of the English kingdom that he ruled,

suffered a major defeat by the Vikings in a place called Maldon, which you might associate with really tasty salt.

Uh, I always tried to make the best of what was a really desperate situation by making a truce with the Vikings and paying them.

You might remember back in the aeons of time when you were fresh on this degree.

In week one,

we looked at a very early law code made by seventh century King in order to understand more about what women experienced in early medieval England.

Um, and we're going to look back at a law code again now for the information it gives us about Astrid's truce with the Vikings.

And this is number two on your hand. Uh, here we are.

Okay, so asteroids, law code, and I'm just going to read this says this is number two, but I'm just going to read from the translation.

In the first place.

A general truce shall be established between King Alfred and all his subjects and the whole Viking fleet to which the King has paid tribute.

In accordance with the terms which archbishop, cigarette and aldermen afford,

and Alderman Ulrich made when they obtained the king's permission to purchase peace for the districts which subject to him they ruled over.

And if any hostile fleets hurry in England, we shall have the help of all of them,

and we shall be under the obligation of finding provisions for them,

as long as they remain with us, and every region which affords protection to any of those.

You, Harry. England, shall be treated as an enemy by us and the aforesaid fleet.

Okay. What's happened here? This is not necessarily a completely clear, uh, set of law codes.

Basically, King also, Red has agreed to pay tribute to the Vikings in order to get them to stop raiding the English.

He pays a huge sum of money, £16,000 on this occasion, which that's a lot of money.

Now you can imagine then, um, and in return, the Vikings, who he has paid, are expected to help protect England against any other raiding Danes.

Okay, because the Vikings are already unified groups. There are various groups.

Point number three, uh, is quite interesting. It says anyone in England who helps Danish raiders will themselves be considered an enemy.

But who would be doing that? Who would be helping the Danish raiders in England?

The law code is referring to those Danes who settled in England during the ninth century, so a long time ago.

These are people who live in England, and whose families may have lived there for a few generations by this point.

So the Danes have multiple identities in England.

There are Danes who have been settled in England, perhaps for a very long time, and may well have become Christian.

There are also Danes who live in Denmark and come to England to raid and pillage.

And there have been all kinds of movements of Danish people in between.

The inclusion of point number three shows the authorities concerns that the subtle stains might offer assistance to the raising Vikings.

He's cultivating an idea of the enemy within.

Though he may not have seen it that way.

He's cultivating a sense of lasting ethnic difference between the Danes and the English, who live in the same land.

And this is a far cry from how the English saw the Danes back in the eighth century,

when Saint Boniface, a missionary, said that the Germanic peoples were of the same bone and blood.

As you might suspect, the English mistrust of the settled Danes does not simply dissipate with time.

Instead, it comes to a head in the most terrible sort of way possible.

In the year 1002, I ordered the all Danes living in England were to be executed.

This came to be known as the Saint Brice's Day Massacre, and the extent of the massacre is debated,

but there is evidence to suggest that the king's orders were at least carried out here in Oxford.

So here is the archaeological site with human remains.

This was discovered on land. But anyone here from Saint John's.

Poor show, Saint John's. Um, maybe they're watching online.

That's fine. Uh, this was found on land that belongs to Saint John's.

So here we go. Um. During a preparatory excavation ahead of new building work in 2008.

Uh, this mass grave of 37 men was discovered all the fighting age.

Uh, the bones radiocarbon dated to the late 10th or early 11th century.

Other chemical analyses showed that the men's diets, uh, included large amounts of seafood,

and this was amongst the evidence that suggested to archaeologists that they were not English,

uh, but Viking Danes and possibly victims of the same Brice's Day massacre, finding that many bodies in one grave.

Um, um, my memory is telling me something about, uh, being able to use the bones to identify violent modes of death.

The massacre of Danish civilians was an act of ethnic cleansing by Iceland's designs to rid England of the perceived inner threat of this group,

who had links to the raiding Vikings. And that's the read, was not remotely repentant for what he had done.

Indeed, contemporary sources construct a narrative in which the Danish civilians pose a threat,

and the English, led by Ethelred, have no choice but to kill them.

Um, I'm so sorry.

I initially wrote the narrative for this lecture years ago, and just just this section always gets more painful every year with contemporary politics.

But this is what happened. Uh, we should pay close attention to the language of these sources and how they seek to justify cold blooded murder.

So here on the slide, I've got a manuscript image for you.

This is a charter. Um, we have our main text across the top.

Uh, and all of these things at the bottom are signatures. All right, so these are all the people who are witnesses to the charter.

Um, and I will read this is section three on your handouts.

This is the text of the charter. A decree was sent out by me.

King Arthur read the second with the counsel of my leading men and magnates, saying that all the Danes,

Vikings who had sprung up in this island, sprouting like cockle amongst the wheat, were to be destroyed by a most just extermination.

And this decree was to be put into effect even as far as just those Danes you dwelt in.

The aforementioned town, striving to escape death, entered this sanctuary of Christ, having broken by force the doors and bolts,

and resolved to make a refuge and defence of themselves therein against the people of the town and the suburbs.

But when all the people in pursuit strove, forced by necessity, to drive them out, and could not,

they set fire to the planks, and burnt, as it seems, this church, with its ornaments and its books.

So also read is describing a scene that happens, uh,

during and as a result of the the order that he gave and surprise this day massacre

that a group of Danish civilians have sought refuge inside a Christian church.

Uh, and that has been then burnt down by the townspeople, killing the people inside.

But the concern here in the charter is actually with the books, um, and the loss of the church.

And we can see how the narrative reconstructs the desperate Danes as enemies, as a word defends the massacre as a just extermination.

And he uses metaphors to present the Danes as weeds among grass.

He presents them as breaking open the church, as though the violence of breaking and entering is the issue,

and the English are portrayed here as having their hand forced.

The Chronicle entry from the year 1002 also defends the massacre.

Um. Yeah.

Uh, and I'll just read a brief extract from that. The King also wrote the second.

Ordered that all Danes be killed on Saint Brice's day,

because he had learned that they conspired to kill him and his counsellors and then take possession of his kingdom.

So this is. I mean, it's horrible and it's predictable, uh, in a way.

Uh, and effects of this massacre, which was definitely, by today's standard, a form of ethnic cleansing,

were felt far off outside of England because among the dead was a woman called Hilda, uh, and she was the sister of Sweyn Fort,

feared the king of Denmark, and Sweyn retaliated by leading an invasion of parts of England the very next year,

and he briefly drove Astrid into exile in the years 1014, 1016, becoming the first Danish king of the English.

So it's in this sort of climate of extreme ethnic hatred and widespread panic that the poem The Battle of Malden was probably composed.

Uh, the battle itself happened in the year 991.

We don't know exactly when the poem is written.

Critics have different ideas on whether it was written by an eyewitness immediately after, whether it's a reconstruction of the time.

I will let you come to your own conclusions. These were increasingly desperate times for the English, and the lack of modes, mode,

or courage among aldermen was contributing to the state of national emergency.

So, yeah, the battle of moles. It's one of your setbacks.

And it is about a real battle that took place nine on one at Melton in Cambridgeshire and at Moulton.

The East Saxon army, led by an alderman named Burt North, were defeated by the Vikings but not died during this battle.

And this was an event of enough significance to be recorded in the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle.

Um, and this is number four on your handouts.

The poem commemorates this defeat in a manner comparable to something like Dunkirk.

Spirit. Right. The idea of the of the noble retreat. At least that's how I read it.

So let's take a look. Um, in the parts of the poem I'm about to read, burn off, the leader of the East Saxons has been offered a deal by the Vikings.

They will spare the East Saxons in exchange for gold.

This is the problem with paying off raiders. Like they will come back for more payoff, right?

Uh, here's Burton's really quite scathing reply. But I'm on a boat.

Uh, I bailed on gas and such a thing. Am loud.

And Mitch, the last a spell that has stint on focus l Mitch is where toda they will air gallon a solution.

I still read as ads. Allegories mean as folk unfold on Fallon.

Sheldon Huffman addressed a tilde to him that you may thinketh that he aim at autumn shadows

and to ship a gang on umber faot and needless fail Heder on ordinary add in big common.

Messengers of the sailors reports back again and say to your people a much more hateful reply,

that here stands unafraid, a noble man with his troop that will protect this homeland.

Affluence, land, my Lord, people and land.

The heathen must fall at battle. It seems too hateful to me that you should go to your ships with our treasures without a fight.

Now that you have come this far into our country.

So three things to notice here. First, that the place that Burt North is defending.

He calls this home land. It's land people and land is defined as a space ruled by the King of Wessex.

Also read The Unready Even though the battle takes place on the coast of what was formerly the Kingdom of Essex, not in the Wessex heartlands.

So this shows us how much the House of Wessex has solidified those formerly

separate English kingdoms under West Saxon rule by the later 10th century seconds.

But North refers to the enemy, the Danish Vikings, as heathens.

And in this poet's view, this battle was a just war fought to defend a Christian land.

This is taking place roughly a century before the First Crusade.

So the language of just warfare is something that's going to occur again and again.

Third and commemorating this battle fought by Christians against non-Christians.

The poet uses the language and form of pre-Christian Germanic alliterative heroic verse, and appears to do so without any sense of irony.

We've come a long way. By the late 10th century, from the world of Beowulf,

where pagan Scandinavian kings were presented as admirable if flawed ancestors of the English themselves.

In this poet's eyes, the English are the Christians and the rightful inhabitants of the land.

The Danes are heathen invaders whose appearance on the Essex coast threatens the survival of the Anglo-Saxon kingdom.

Iceland's land. There is a good deal of critical disagreements about the purpose of this battle poem, and in the simplest terms,

we can divide critics between those who read it as a praise poem for the East Saxon alderman Burt North,

who was killed at the battle, and those who see it as a critique of the alderman's conduct, a sort of lament for the futility of war.

And at the heart of the poem is an episode, The Flight of Odin's Sons.

These two men, once they realise the battle is not going well, they decide to run away and hide in the woods, which feels kind of fair enough,

but the poet unequivocally blames such people who flee, choosing their own lives over the death, over death, amongst their comrades.

Fleeing the scene of battle, especially when you were losing, was considered especially shameful within this wider cultural movement.

I mean, I think that has been true of many cultural moments.

And I'll read you the relevant section from the Battle of Malden, which is also on your handouts.

Number five, and I'll just read the translation here.

They turns them from the battle. Those that did not wish to be that their or just sons became the first to flee.

Godric went from the battle and abandons that good one who had often given him many horses.

He leapt on that steeds that his Lord owned in those trappings, in such a way that was not right.

And his brothers with him both fled. God, Weena and God weak.

They cared not for the fight, but the time they turned from that war and sought out the woods,

fled to that fastness, and saved their lives, and many more than was at all fitting.

If they had at all remembered the benefits which he then Lord, had given them to help them.

This emphasis on the things that have been given by the Lord,

we could compare with another section of a poem we're likely to look at, which is close towards the end of Beowulf,

when Beowulf is fighting the dragon, he has a group of retainers with him, and only one of those retainers comes to join him in the battle.

A man called Wig Laugh, whose name literally means remainder of war um and we glove chastises the other members of the retinue,

saying, you know, our Lord gave us things. And we sat on the meat benches and we promised to follow him.

It is that circular economy of loyalty for reward, and that contract is broken in that moment.

And we see the same emphasis here in Mauldin on the compact being broken.

The Lord has given them their things, and they are actually using those things, those horses, to run away from him in his hour of need.

And this attention to the flight of the warriors from battle taps into a broader anxiety about failures of loyalty.

And this anxiety was also addressed by Archbishop Woolston, the leading churchman of the day.

Alston made a famous state of the nation address, uh, called the Samo loopy ad angles, that is Latin for sermon of the Wolf to the English.

It's a pun on his own name. Wolf Stan literally means wolf stone, which is kind of a cool name.

Um. This sermon was delivered in various forms between the year 1010 and the year 1016.

So, you know, a some and it's something that's done in performance.

So we have written texts, but the idea of changes and serial production makes sense when something is being written for,

uh, presentation or performance. And sermons can be really wonderful text for us to examine.

That might not sound like a big deal, but I would encourage you to think about it.

A they are made for preaching to an audience.

Uh, so they're often full of rhetorical and stylistic devices designed to catch your attention, uh, and persuade you.

And secondly, they tell us something really important about what certain groups in society were concerned about.

If you were preaching, you were going to preach about what you think your congregation needs to hear.

And that's useful for us to understand. In this particular sermon, which is number six on your handouts, just an extract of it,

will Stan identifies the lack of loyalty amongst the English as the root of all the disasters which have befallen them of late.

So, uh, number six laugh and men acknowledge that source is they are swaddled is on offset.

Uh, on it. Nay, I'll cast them and uh. And thy hit is on world uh, swelling as well, where Sir Unsworth hits shale.

New to Ford Focus soon and uh Antichrist as to Cooma if Valley and Swiss uh on two hits worse than egg is lich on the grim lich we to on what older

understand us yeah you wanna that devil that sailed and who fell a guy out as well order to switch onto that little getaway off the wet and mid manam.

Beloved men, they often men. Beloved men. This is a standard way of beginning a romantic address.

Beloved men recognise what the truth is. This world is in haste, and it is drawing near the end.

And therefore, the longer it is, the worse it will get in the world.

And it needs must thus become very much worse as a result of the people's sins prior to the advent of Antichrist.

And then indeed it will be terrible and cruel throughout the world.

Understands properly also that for many years now the devil has led this nation to far astray, and there has been little loyalty among men.

So stirring stuff will stand in the moulds and poets, um.

Uh, pointing to the very same kind of failings.

If the English are too craven to defend their own land from the Vikings, they deserve the wrath of God in the form of the he has and a shale gas.

Um, and there's a bit more of the sun. And that way you can see that as far as Archbishop Houston is concerned,

the English have brought this trouble upon themselves, um, through their own sin.

We might remember back to when the very earliest Viking invasion sacked Lindisfarne.

Um, the monastery that I, um, this was not seen as a sign that Christianity was failing.

It was seen as a sign that somebody needed to suffer in order to learn the lesson.

Um. Whoever was responsible for the entries in the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle for this period takes a

similarly pessimistic view of English attempts to organise their defences against the Vikings.

Um, and in particular we hear about a shady alderman called Alfred.

Uh, and this is on your handout number seven, an unreliable alderman.

So this is the entry from nine nine to.

Then the king and all his counsel, we turn, advised that men should gather all the ships that were owned to London.

And the King instructed Alderman Alfred to lead the army and al-Saud,

and Bishop Austen and Bishop Ashby figure that they should try, if they could, anywhere without and trap the enemy.

Note the fighting bishops. Interesting. Then the alderman Alfred Rich, sent and had the Viking army warned.

And on the night before the day on which they were to have joined battle, he fled from the levies to his own great disgrace,

and the Viking army got away, except for one single ship in which the men were slaughtered.

So the King has attempted to make a plan to trap the Viking ships, but one of his own advisers has tipped off the Vikings so that they can get away.

Unlike the Battle of Maldon, the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle is naming and shaming those who run away.

Um, and we get a similar thing in an entry from 993 and Bamburgh specific naming of people who have betrayed.

And this is number eight on your handouts, which you are welcome to look at in your own time.

So it seems that the reputation of alderman was severely under threat in the late 10th and 11th century.

How does a poem like the Battle of Malden fit into this climate?

What a subtle critique of a perhaps overly confident alderman.

Really find a ready audience. Well, does it make more sense to read the poem as a relatively unsophisticated call to arms,

glorifying the heroic self-sacrifice of Burt Noss and his men?

I'm not going to answer that question. That's for you to think about.

So there's a complexities of this period, certainly, but some important major takeaways that you can keep in mind are as follows.

The threat posed to the English by the Danish incursion and Danish settlements,

by English retribution and unending war, wound up in ethnic division that was exerted in the literature of the period.

That's one to the importance of leadership in the social setup of the period and the

consequences of poor leadership also massively preoccupied contemporary writing.

And finally, this is a period made up of variously stable and turbulent reigns, shifting boundaries,

shifting loyalty, uncertainty off to that nice, stable period when Alfred and his successors had reigned in 1066,

William the Conqueror successful invasion of England set off a wave of cultural and linguistic change,

which continued to play out over the course of hundreds of years.

One hugely significant factor is the entry of French into England,

which developed into a dialect known as Anglo-Norman, so the Norman spoken in the Anglo regions.

Anglo Norman had a huge impact on the English, on its grammar, its vocabulary and its sounds.

And this is the motion that takes us from Old English to Middle English.

But Old English doesn't. As I mentioned at the beginning, stopped being spoken overnight in 1066.

This is a slow process of transformation and one that is heavily inflected by class.

In the early period, it was only the new aristocracy brought in by William the Conqueror, who spoke Norman.

The working classes still spoke vernacular English, and they learnt the French words that they needed to survive.

One of the earliest French words to enter the English language is the word for juggler,

and other words to do with feasting and partying, as people sold their services to a new upper class.

So now I'm going to show you two late old English poems copied after the conquest.

Uh, several poems survived to us from the 11th century.

This is where we are now. The year 1000 onwards.

And these ones are written down in manuscripts that are significantly later from the 12th century.

So they clearly had some currency that meant that people were willing to keep copying them out.

In the 11th and 12th centuries, the English language enters a significant period of change.

Um, and you may have got a little taster of this in the intro to this paper at the start of term.

Uh, some of you may study this early form of Middle English in your colleges.

When the Norman Conquest occurred, the upper classes who ruled England very quickly became French speaking,

and so the English language absorbed a lot of influences from French,

both in terms of vocabulary like that word juggler, but also in other senses,

like style of poetry, um, extremely quickly and then continued over the next few hundred years.

And it's one reason why Old English is just so very different from modern English.

The influence of French is massive. So we're going to look at a morality poem called instructions for Christians.

Again, doesn't sound scintillating, but it's useful. And a poem from the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle on the occasion of William the Conqueror.

Death. Uh, these poems are very different in their thematic focuses, so we'll see that in the last days of early medieval England,

people are still writing on a range of topics in the vernacular.

We'll also see that the stylistic features of Old English change a bit in this later period.

The Rhyme of King William. A poem about King William's death appears in the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle entry for the year 1087,

and it survives in just one manuscript, now held by the Bodleian Library here in Oxford.

It is a memorial poem that commemorates the death of the Conqueror that same year.

And it's number ten on your handout. I don't think it's going to be quite what you would expect from a commemorative poem.

It certainly isn't like the one that we had earlier about Edgar.

So let's have a read. Castille, as he led, were two Chan and ad men.

Sweep the sunshine. Sickening was swaths with a stack and Bynum of his under say old man.

Mine is Mark gold and my hundred opened a Selfridges that hinnom Bewitched and Midnight's Children unrest of his landlord of little renown.

He was on yet sung a powerful and and greatly necessary love for Amidala.

He sat to Mitchell death rests and he like it a larger that was that sua was logo had also hidden the that he and a man shale to blend in

hey forbade the hurt us will charge the but us sparse with the Hilda fold of the hair down spilt your hair what a hair to feather out.

She said to bear them hard on that t most afraid of fat on his rich a men had men on, and the atom a man hits.

Piccolo rode on up. She was was this Latino roster her elder niece at she most on midday all at the school.

[INAUDIBLE] will fall again if he walls and Liban also land haben land also actor also well his psyche the Wallowa that any man shelled a Morgan sua.

He and herself up a haber and offer a elemental than say a mystic.

A God could say his cell the male heart Nissa and do him his sinner forgiveness.

My immediate be able to sense that it rhymes.

Not in like the most appealing kind of way, but it does. Um, this memorial poem is not a sparkling praise of King's Williams legacy.

Rather, it is full of invective against his rulership, his program of castle building,

his taxation of the people and his management of natural resources here, hunting forests.

In its closing lines, we have the lament Wallowa, that any man's shoulder American soil.

I've just realised I didn't read the translation. Let's do that quickly. He allowed castles to be built and wretched men to work the land.

The king was just that harsh, and he deprived his subjects of many marks of gold and more hundreds of pounds of silver that he took from the people,

and with great injustice from his land, people out of a small, i.e. meagre, the desire he was fallen into avarice.

And among everything he loved greediness. He appointed a great deer sanctuary,

and laid down laws there with such that whoever either slew sloopy the heart or hind, uh, that man must be blinded.

He forbade the hearts I he forbade people to hunt them.

And just also the boys. Just so he loved the deer as though he was their own father.

Also, he forbade the hares that they might be allowed to go about freely.

They didn't like that the rabbits could run around freely without being hunted. You got to eat, I guess.

Um. Men lamented his authority and the wretched man complained about it.

But he, William, was so unyielding that he did not care at all for their troubles.

But they most, among all things, follow the king's desire if they wish to live or hold land or possessions, or, well, his friendship.

Alas, that any man should be so proud to raise himself up and count himself over all men.

May the Almighty God exercise mercy on his soul and give him forgiveness of his sins.

Okay. You might think like castles. What's wrong with castles?

Well, what do you think of castles nowadays? Your view is probably inflected by a particular kind of Victorian romanticism.

The idea of the beautiful castle, damsel in distress, uh,

Victorian art ruins that you might visit around the country, Warwick Castle, that sort of thing.

Amazing. Um, but that's not what castles were, right?

Well, I've got a video on my screen. Let's see if we can.

Duplicate. Just meditate upon castles for a moment.

Think about what they mean for you.

Yes. Okay, great. Or.

Wave. Have you seen the film? Independence day. It gets fewer and fewer every year.

And it's how I know I'm getting old. Okay. Oh, okay.

It appears that we cannot do this. I'm really sorry. I'm going to put a link to this in my hand up.

I encourage you to go watch it. Um, if the it comes back, maybe I'll get this put on.

In Independence Day, a massive, hulking, um, spaceship appears over New York City.

That is much more like what a castle is like. A castle is not like a whimsy fairy tale thing.

I love that, uh, it is a military installation that turns up on your doorstep and threatens to kill you if you do not abide,

um, by the principles of the people living inside it.

So the fact that castles appear at the start of this poem, um, the very first word of the poem is symbolic of that kind of relationship.

Costless is also not a word that comes from Old English.

It is a word that has come into the language with the Normans. So we also have the impact of this, um, Anglo-Norman word at the beginning of the text.

Um, really, we have the Victorians to thank for the romanticisation of castles.

So. Fine. Um, right.

What else is unusual about this old English poem? Uh, it uses and rhyme.

Okay. We had these sort of, like, bouncy rhymes, um, and we just don't get structural rhyme in Old English poetry.

As a rule. I wouldn't say the rhyme in this poetry is well structured,

but somebody is definitely trying to incorporate it as a systematic feature rather than a sort of one off device.

Uh, indeed, early editors actually excluded this poem from the corpus of Old English first, because they were so determined to the end.

Rhyme just didn't feature, even though it is evidently written in Old English.

Seth Lehrer has suggested that the experimental style of this poem, um, using both vernacular English poetics and Latinate poetics, uh,

makes a social criticism out of formal patterns as it, quote,

makes social criticism out of formal patterns, bringing both together in order to criticise the new regime.

Um, I've marked up the text on your handout in three different ways.

The underlined syllables show rhyme within the same line,

with the rhyming sounds usually falling at the end of each half line, but not always as a couplet in the last two lines.

Characters in bold show a little relation within the line, and characters in italics show alliteration between verse lines,

and I've been extremely generous in suggesting which characters and syllables

might be drawn into parallelism with one another through alliteration of rhyme.

Uh, because of the ambiguity and inconsistency of the general scheme.

The departure from those formal rules which are generally governed earlier.

Centuries of Old English verse makes the style of this text much more difficult to assess, particularly with regards to alliteration.

Um lines five, 15 and 18 are reasonably regular by Old English standards, but that's kind of it.

Um. Rome in the poem just does not work according to a consistent scheme.

It's sometimes full. We have Laura, Nyota, sometimes partial hinder, blend in,

sometimes polysyllabic like Victor and Johnny Rishta, but sometimes just the inflections at the end of words.

Gold is selfless. Usually it's word final, but sometimes word internal, like hundred and plunder.

And it's usually at the close of each half line, but sometimes within the half line,

like Bynum and Marne, and once between the endings of two full lines.

The very final Old English poem that we're going to look at, copied during the 12th century is called instructions for Christians,

and it's a didactic religious poem found in Cambridge University Library.

Oof, that's a long one. Miss I 133.

Why are they called things like this? Because there are a lot of manuscripts that we have to find in the library,

and the manuscript is mostly made up of sermons and homilies, also in Old English.

Um, and this particular poem that I'm going to read you the translation of has been called uninteresting and undistinguished as poetry by critics.

Um, so I really leaving you on alone? I like a boring poem, but I don't know, maybe you can capture something interesting about it and bring it back.

Right? It's nice for us to kind of look at stuff that has been neglected by the Academy a bit.

Um, so the following extracts primarily handles the responsibility faced by one with the ability to learn.

I knew there was a point in the ending on this one, because you guys have the ability to learn.

Okay, so I'm just going to read the translation here.

And it is on your handout. I think it's 9 or 11. He who for a long time off descends, has thought to have restraint.

Um, that just as though he were in a state of fragility to please God, and as though he kept himself clean for Christ's love.

Just so whichever man may so learn something and does not now wish to do so, he is hateful to God.

Um, okay, I'm actually feeling bad now that I said this was fear inspiration and his soul is greatly guilty.

But to those who desire love and wisdom, he gives it with the mind mighty gods with his two hands through the Holy Ghost.

The concealed skill and the hidden good are not entirely dissimilar.

It is better if the foolish one can lock up his foolishness within his breast than that the wise one.

The entire time of his high need covers up his wisdom.

But you must continually instruct and teach, while the Almighty God grants you power, lest it cause sorrow for you.

At the end, after the count of days when you may no longer do it,

teach your child the good examples and so also to all people, then you will earn eternal bliss.

And after this world great honour, he who long attends to learning through holy books here in the world,

it will long remedy the learned one, and also build up the undaunted one.

And the soul just so will be cleansed and makes that heart that much happier.

It also makes the noble, uh, the one who is not so before.

Also, it sometimes sets free the enslaved God must consider man.

That is a proper prayer for all men that he considered, on which he then speaks.

Sorry, that which he then speaks. What on earth is all that about?

Uh, basically it's saying that if you can learn and choose not to, you're in trouble.

Um, but you will have wonderful things if you choose to learn.

And you mustn't hide your wisdom. So speak up in your classes and your tutorials.

Um, it also tells me that I must teach as much as I can while I still have time.

Um, and that will be very happy if we do that. So congratulations on coming to the end of this first lecture series.

I hope we have learned things together. Um, and that you will go ahead and keep going to the text lectures through the rest of time.

I'll see some of you in, Hilary, no doubt, for lectures on Old English riddles.

Have a lovely rest of Michaelmas. Oh.

