[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
So you're free to kind of annotate around it and so on. It is also up on the canvas website.

Um, both as a PDF and as a word docs. So you can, if you wish, annotate it that way.

So if I can have a quick hand up, very quick hand up on those who like a paper copy because we're under.

Fab. And those who are happy to annotate on line without paper.

Brilliant. That gives me an idea of trying to not destroy too many trees, and yet give all those who want a handout a handout.

So Oscar Wilde. As Wilde said, would you like to know the great drama of my life?

It is that I have put my genius into my life. I have only put my talents into my work.

That's something that I rather wish Wilde hadn't said.

One of the few things I really wish he hadn't said,

because Wilde's life dominated criticism of Wilde from his kind of from almost before his death, all the way through to about the 1980s.

So most critical studies of Wilde in that time tended to spend a lot of time on his life and read his works as almost kind of homophobic,

pathological expressions of of his identity.

Now, since the 19 late 1970s, 1980s,

there's been a huge plethora of different critical approaches to Wilde and an

enormous divergence of opinion about Wilde and what's important to his works.

So much so that in 1997, when Stephen Fry was asked to play Wilde in a film of Wilde's life, he received,

as he recounts in a New Yorker article in 97, a huge number of letters advising him on what was important in Wilde's works.

Dear Mr. Fry, I hope you will not be forgetting that the key, the only key to Oscar,

is that he was and is for first and foremost, Irish, dear Mr. Fry.

Wilde's works Winnie and Shiver with Victorian gay underground codes.

Do not shirk the force of his sexual identity, dear Mr. Fry.

Wilde's love of his wife and family is consistently overlooked by biographers.

I trust you will not fall into the same error, dear Mr. Fry.

Wilde's lifetime yearnings towards Roman Catholicism are central to any understanding.

Dear Mr. Fry, I draw your attention towards Wilde, soul of man and of socialism.

Oscar's unique brand of libertarianism is scandalously overlooked by contemporary day, Mr. Fry.

Oscar Wilde was, in reality, a woman. This secret was passed to me by my grandfather, who had a lesbian affair with her, in part I shall in June 1897.

Dear Mr. Fry. Oscar Wilde soul entered my body on lights of August, 1963.

Um. And a similar, if slightly less mad in the fringes, um, layer.

A sort of sort of plethora of approaches characterise the critical writing on Oscar Wilde.

So, for example, you have Wilde as gay writer and icon from early detractors,

homophobic writers through to Christopher Craft, Richard Delmore and Neil McKenna, um, Gary Smigel and so on.

You've got Wilder's Irish critics such as Declan Keyboard, Robert Pine, Jarlath McKean, Michael Gillespie,

Vicky Mahaffey and Marky Wilder's political radical from really early study of him in the 1950s by George Woodcock,

through works by Regina Garnier, through early work by Ian Small.

You've Got Wilde is Irish and radical, an interesting play by Terry Eagleton.

You've got Wilder's Conservative, the work of Norbert Colon, later work by Ian Small.

You have Wilder Scholar as a really serious, dedicated thinker and studier.

And the study, the addition of the Oxford Notebooks and other wild writings done by Michael Health and Philip Smith.

Or you've got Wilde as an idle, lazy jobbing writer,

simply interested in the money he can make and plagiarising others, which is the work like Josephine Small.

You've got an extraordinarily different layer of approaches to what modernist, gay, bisexual, plagiarist?

Professional writer? Selfishness? Celebrity. Dandy?

Cosmopolitan. So one question would be, is it necessary in any way to choose between these?

At which point I would turn to other wild sayings.

Where in Deep Profundity criticises Alfred Douglas because you had not yet been able to acquire the Oxford temper in intellectual matters.

Never, I mean been, one who could play gracefully with ideas, but had arrived at the violence of opinion merely or as wild.

I think. What is one of the most useful things that Wilde said, especially when it comes to critical approaches?

Surely you do not think that criticism is like the answer to a sum.

The richer the work of art, the more diverse are the true interpretations.

There is not one answer only, but many answers. I pity that book on which critics are agreed.

It must be a very obvious and shallow production.

So what you have are all these multiple different wilds, often according to the perspective of the interests of the of the critic themselves.

As Wilde warns in the preface to Picture of Dorian Grey.

It is the spectator and not life that art really mirrors, and that includes the different approaches of different countries.

So, for example, this great collection of essays edited by Stefano Evangelist Oscar Wilde in Europe and which in some sense,

which every country has their own version of Wilde with different works as the most important one,

was, um, and I probably ought to fess up, as I'm kind of giving these lectures where I'm trying not to impose my own views too much.

But my own version of Wilde is anarchist, socialist and feminist.

So make of that what you will. So there's this idea of the projection of ourselves in the act of criticism.

How far we're seeing our own obsessions as we view things is something that,

before I venture further into Wilde, it's actually Wilde himself makes core in so many of his work.

So in Salome, each character, as they enters, looks at the moon.

So when the page of Herodias, who is in in Love with, um, there's a page, a courageous and the young Syrian on the page of Herodotus,

the young Syrian is obsessed with Salome and the young Syrian in love with the page of Herodias.

So the page of Rudeus looks at the moon and says, how strange the moon seems.

She's like a woman rising from a tomb. She's like a dead woman, one might fancy.

She is looking for dead things. And the young Syrian says she has a strange look.

She's like a little princess who wears a yellow veil and his feet are of silver.

She's like a princess who has little white doves for fleet feet one might fancy.

She was dancing. And the page of her? There's answers. She is like a woman who is dead.

She moves very slowly. And then when Salome herself enters, she looks at the moon and declares, how good to see the moon.

She's like a little piece of money, a little silver flower. She is cold and chaste.

I am sure she is a virgin. She has the beauty of a virgin.

Yes, she is a virgin. She has never defiled herself. She has never abandoned herself to men like the other goddesses.

And Herod, when he enters, looks at the moon and even more extravagantly declares, the moon has a strange look tonight.

Has she not a strange look? She is like a mad woman, a mad woman who is seeking everywhere for lovers.

She is naked too. She is quite naked. The clouds are seeking to clothe her nakedness, but she will not let them.

She shows herself naked in the sky. She reels through the clouds like a drunken woman.

I am sure she is looking for lovers. Does she not dream like a drunken woman?

She is like a mad woman. Is she not a witch? His wife Herodias, rather crushing you, replies, no, the moon is like the moon, that is all.

Um, and what you have there, each of them obviously projecting their own obsessions onto the moon,

but also in many ways projecting their own versions of Salome herself as well, onto the moon,

so that Salome, as a character within the play, is a dutiful daughter to Herodias.

She is this object of lust to Herod. She's, um, a corrupt, seductive woman, the [INAUDIBLE] of Babylon to your canon.

So in that sense, then, all sorts of questions about what you're seeing as you're saying,

and especially in this sense, the play is built around this idea of subjectivity or projection about in the world,

in the act of looking at the world, on the way we create the world for ourselves,

how we remake the world in our own image, in the very act of looking at it.

And in that sense, it's in one way a sort of rewrite of The Myth of the Medusa.

So the Medusa being the snake headed monster that can turn into stone if you look at her, um,

and who Perseus kills by only seeing her reflection in the shield, and the ways in which, in Salome both being looked at, gives you power.

So Salome reproaches your canon that he's never he has not look at looked at her, and if he looked at her, she he would love her.

But also the act of looking is an act of power. So there's a kind of it's the whole plays in some ways about looks, so that, as Herod concludes,

neither at things nor at people should one look only in mirrors, should one look for mirrors?

Do but show us masks. In other words, only instead of the idea of take a look in the mirror and you'll see the truth,

it's only looking at yourself in the mirror that we will fall for our own self performance,

that we will see what we want to see as against revealing ourselves as we look at the world.

Um, so the idea that the world is a reflection of who we think we are, our own obsessions mirrored back to us.

And this and also that idea of the power of what we look at to change us, which is potentially the power of the work of art.

And that Wilde's works on walls philosophy, you'll look at that way in which we reshape what we see,

the power of the subjective gaze, but also the power of what we look at to change us.

So that very subtle and complex and often very unpredictable exchange that happens within that so wild life to turn back to that itself.

To give you a brief summary, for those who don't know, he was born in 1854, in Ireland.

He was son of Sir William Wild, who was an eye surgeon, and Lady Wild, who wrote nationalist poetry under the pen name Speranza.

Um. They they lived in Merrion Square, which is one of the posher areas, the richer areas of Dublin.

Um. He then went on to study classics at Trinity College, Dublin, and then in 1874 came to Maudling College,

where he again he took a second BA in Classics in Literary Humanities, and in 1878 won the Newdegate Prize for his poem Ravenna.

1881. His first volume of poetry is released to very mixed reviews.

Um, and then he goes on a lecture tour of the United States and Canada,

partly to advertise or mainly sort of backing up the advertising and touring production of Gilbert and Sullivan's comic opera patients,

which is parodying aestheticism. And Wilde at this point describes himself in his passport as a professor of aesthetics.

So he's kind of gained a beyond an international fame for his art theories at that point.

Um, in 1884, he marries Constance Lloyd, and he has two sons, Vivian and Cyril,

born in 1885 and 8618 87 to 89, he takes over the editorship of the What's Then the Ladies world,

renames it The Woman's World, and turns it from a magazine of fashion and gossip into a real kind of intellectual powerhouse of a magazine for.

Talking about women's lives and ideas and theories and employment and professions and campaigned for rights.

Um, sales plummet and he can't be bothered anymore.

And it goes back to more or less fashion and gossip. Um, 1888, his first volume of short stories is published, The Happy Prince and Other Tales,

which is actually the only one of his publications that goes through several editions during his lifetime.

That's by far the most popular of his writings, um, during his lifetime.

1891 is often taken as his annus mirabilis, the real breakthrough year,

in which he publishes another collection of short stories, the House of pomegranates.

Um. The dialogues on Art and his other essays are collected together and published.

His intentions and the extended novel version of Picture of Dorian Grey is also published in 1891.

It is also more faithfully the year in which he meets Lord Alfred Douglas.

Um. The years that follow 1892 to 5 are when his play he breaks out, breaks through as a dramatist.

So Lady Windermere's Fan, A woman, No Importance and Ideal Husband,

and The Importance of Being Earnest are all performed between 1892 and 1895, and it's an 1890 5th February.

In March 1895, with both The Importance of Being Earnest and an Ideal Husband running in the West End to huge,

fashionable audiences, that he brings the libel accusation against the the Marquess of Queensberry,

Lord Alfred Douglas's father, where Douglas had left um Queensberry had left a note describing at Wilde Club, describing him as a posing some.

Um. Wilde brings a prosecution for libel.

It becomes clear in the course of the trials that Queensberry has gathered a huge amount of evidence while drops the libel prosecution,

but is then arrested. He doesn't flee the country, despite advice.

It's been arrested. Tried again.

At first there's a hung jury, tried a third time and found guilty of the crime of gross indecency and condemned to the harshest possible sentence,

which is two years with hard labour. Um, it breaks his health.

And after. When he leaves prison, he's basically.

His health comes apart. He writes nothing else that really makes him any money, particularly.

And he ends up in penury and dies only two years later.

And 18 in 1900. Um, the two things he does write, however, in prison he writes the work that is now better known as De Profundis,

which is an 80 page inverted commas letter to Lord Alfred Douglas.

And he also, upon his release, writes The Ballad of Reading Gaol, which is his one exercise in what you might call realism.

And it's the one of his poems that's really lasted. So it's a long ballad form poem.

So that's world's life. So there's a question of what you make of it.

What's that? So many critics are in search of the true wild.

The, uh. Uh, but I'd warn against that. The idea of a true identity.

A core identity that's essential. It's something that Wilde himself philosophically questions constantly.

So Wilde enormously interested in the multiform self, in the performed self,

in the changeable and a self of multiple possibilities and the self-created self.

So he challenges divisions to be true and false between mask and self.

Um, he also in all of his plays, in his works, anybody who tries to pin down and judge someone else by single labels good, bad, clever, um, wicked.

Whatever the plays challenge, those undermine them.

The complexity and difficulty of judgement is something that's central to his work.

Um, at the same time, you have to be.

That his life in different ways.

That quote that I started with wild fashions himself and he turns his life, his public persona, his celebrity persona into a work of art in itself.

So these are the 1882 photographs taken by the already then rising celebrity photographer Napoleon Seraphine.

Um, they're all highly theatrical, um, and indeed, uh, it was the photographer who provided a lot of the props here,

and then ended up in a legal fight where he won the copyright for these.

So there's a whole thing about whose wild image belongs to,

but also ideas of how far his image is part of this kind of public performance in different ways, with questions about identity.

So with all of this question of performance and masks and identity and how you judge and labels and so on.

I will now ask you to turn to De Profundis, as it is known, because that's the work,

the work written in prison that's often seen that critics, certainly to start with, wanted to see it as wild, with a frivolity burnt off.

The true sincere, the authentic, wild in some way. Speaking for the first time.

Now. The ways in which the work was written.

He had permission in prison to write a letter to Lord Alfred Douglas.

So he wrote an eight page letter. Um, and there are all sorts of things in that question about what it is.

It's a work that is typically while. So it's very, very hard to say what genre it belongs to.

Um, it's equally difficult to say whether it's confession or apology, whether it's an act of defiance or an act of apology.

Um, it's a work that's about writing itself, as so many works are.

Um, and it's very, very complex. And as with many of Wilde's works, it's also worth knowing about its derivation, about its composition,

because that's part of how you can or the questions it raises on how you read it.

So Wilde wrote the manuscript in Reading Gaol in prison.

Supposedly it was meant to be that he was not allowed access to what he was had already written.

But the clean, the Soviet, and the way in which, across those 80 pages there are sections that we quote earlier,

sections or sections that seem to have been clean copy.

That suggests it provides that it was given more generous conditions for the composition than were technically allowed.

Um, so the manuscript Wilde planned to send to Robert Ross while he was in prison, but actually he wasn't allowed to.

But it was written between January 1890, January, and March 1897 as the is the estimate for most on when it was begun, and Wilde,

at a point when he thought he would be allowed to send the manuscript to Robert Ross, gave the following very precise instructions.

My dear Robbie, I send you in a roll separate from this my letter to Alfred Douglas,

which I hope will arrive safe as soon as you, and of course, more add whom I always include with you have read it.

I want you to have it carefully copied for me. There are many reasons why I wish this to be done.

One will suffice. I want you to be my literary executor and would like you to have all my works.

Well, if you are my literary executor, you must be in possession of the only document that really gives any explanation

of my extraordinary behaviour with regard to Queensberry and Alfred Douglas.

When you have read the letter,

you will see the psychological explanation of a course of conduct from the outside seems a combination of absolute idiocy with vulgar bravado.

I do not defend my conduct. I explain it.

Also, there are in the letter certain passages which deal with my mental development in prison and the

inevitable evolution of character and intellectual attitude towards life that has taken place.

And I want you and others who still stand by me and have affection for me, to know exactly in what mood and manner I hope to face the world.

And of course, I need not remind you how fluid a thing thought is with me, with us all, and that what an evanescent substance are our emotions made?

He then continues with further precise instructions on how the manuscript is to be treated.

He says, sending the manuscript to Robert Ross. I wish a copy to be done not on tissue paper, but on good paper,

such as used for plays, and the wide replicated margin should be left for corrections.

The copy done and verified from the manuscript.

The original should be dispatched to aid Alfred Douglas by more and another copy done by the typewriter.

So you should have a copy as well as myself.

So what was in fact happened was the manuscript was released together with Wilde from Redding Jail in May 1897.

Well, then handed it over to Robert Ross at Dieppe.

Um, and Ross didn't exactly follow Wilde's instructions.

So instead of he had the copies made, but he didn't send the original manuscript to Alfred Douglas.

Instead, he sent Douglas one of the copies and kept the manuscript for which we are very, very grateful, because, as um,

Alfred Douglas later said, he threw it in the fire and burnt it as soon as he received had read the cover letter.

Um, now instead, what I have what Douglas Ross then did with the manuscript is that in 1919, 1909,

he gave it to the British Museum with instructions that it was not to be opened for further 50 years.

However, in 1905. Ross took a section approximately a third of the manuscript, and had it published under the title De Profundis.

So that title is Ross's title for it, and what was published as paper of this was about a third of it, and a third that made no mention,

no indication of the fact that it was originally addressed to Alfred Douglas, and there's nothing much about Douglas in there.

Instead, it's about Walt's changes at what he calls his changing moods of thought and so on in prison.

So it's his meditations on art and, um, his sort of thinking about sin and all the rest of it is in there.

In 1912, a critic called Arthur Ransome wrote a critical study of Wilde which provoked or which prompted Alfred Douglas to sue him.

Um and in court, Robert Ross allowed De Profundis to be brought out of the British Museum and brought as evidence in defence of Arthur Ransome.

Um. Douglas then left the courtroom rather than here at um.

Furthermore, a year later, in 1913, he then wrote a book called Oscar Wilde and Myself,

which was a sort of self-justification which included his sheer horror and surprise to hear the World was gay,

as came out in The Trials, which, of course, he knew nothing about.

Um. He then wrote a further autobiography, um, with a entirely contradictory to that a few years later.

Douglas is a whole other kettle of fish, and nobody who really likes Wilde can ever feel fond of Douglas.

I'm afraid he was a nasty little piece of spoil work, but let's leave that aside.

Um, so what then? The first point that De Profundis, if I just use that title in search of meaning the manuscript as a whole,

the first point of that manuscript is published as anything like complete form was 1962.

Within The Complete Letters of Oscar Wilde, edited by Rupert Davis.

So what we have that that long history is, it's partly about the ways in which how do you understand it?

How do you understand a letter that is addressed to Lord Alfred Douglas, but also to explain himself to his friends,

to explain himself to the world that is described as that he asked for it to be copied onto paper with white,

and the term replicated margin of replication margin is what you have on a religious text,

so that you can make a huge number of annotations and things like that. It's also an instruction.

He wants it copied, like his play, so he can keep editing it together with instructions on different sections to be sent to his friends.

I don't know about you, but the idea of a love letter written to a lover that you then want chunks of sent to different friends,

etc., and that you want to keep it as edited and you want your literary executor also to have a copy.

It's a very interesting version of a letter.

Um, so in that sense, these multiple readers, if Wilde's theories about contain anything, it's the idea that each reader is a different work.

So if it's intended for all sorts of different readers,

it's offering itself to all sorts of different ways of reading that question of what it is, what it's about, how you're meant to read it.

It's a deeply, as with so many of Wilde's, a deeply unstable text.

Um, and I think the best edition available of it right now is an edition by Ian Small.

It's in the Oxford University Press. Um, Oxford English text series.

It's kind of there in navy blue covers with gold writing on the outside.

They should be in every college library they're available on solo.

And what in small does is his edition of De Profundis is two separate works.

One he calls De Profundis, which is the exit as instructed to be sent to friends.

So in effect, the sort of 1905 version. The other is the full manuscript version, which he titled in culture.

It vernaculars in prison and in chains, and I will come to where he gets that title from.

So he himself says it's two different works, potentially, but could it be many, many more works if you read through?

Well, it's instructions on which bits he wants taken out and so on.

So what do we do with this? How do we read it? What is it?

In one sense, the manuscript itself, the work itself is a kind of it's like a multi layer cake in some ways or kind of mill free.

It's got lots of layers with different things sandwiched between.

So part of it is accusations of dunk of Alfred Douglas, the ways in which he failed to appreciate,

while the contrast between himself and a life of intellect and genius and art and Douglas,

and a life of indulgence and appetites and sort of whims and emotions rather than thoughts.

The book, however, through the work there's an enumeration of all the kind of the,

the, um, the costs incurred by Lord Alfred Douglas details a blow by blow,

a enumeration of bills and meals and everything else so that if the if his accusation is based on a sort of.

Division between the spiritual and the intellectual versus the physical and appetite.

The the sort of wild versus Douglas that doesn't work in the sense that the two are inseparable as you work through the the work.

There's an inherent intermingling between pettiness and greatness, the physical and the spiritual, the financial and the intellectual and so on.

So it sets us oppositions that itself quite deliberately undermines and collapses.

Within the within the work. That's also a quite wonderful portrait of wild himself, a self drawn portrait.

So he describes the way in which he is unable to break away from the thrall, being in thrall to Lord Alfred Douglass,

his loss losing his own will power, um, giving way to Douglass in small things until he could no longer assert himself in great things.

Um, as he talks about it blindly, I staggered as an ox to the shambles, the shambles being the slaughterhouse, the abattoir.

And he says afterwards, with great irony at the end, I was, of course, arrested.

And your father became the hero of the hour, more indeed than the hero of the hour.

Merely your family now ranks, strangely enough, with the immortals, for with that grotesqueness of effect,

that is, as it were, a Gothic element in history, and makes Cleo the least serious of all the muses.

Your father will always live among the kind pure minded parents of Sunday school literature.

Your place is with the infant Samuel, and in the lowest mire of malleable age, I sit between the rats and the monkey Tussaud.

Now there's wonderful. Not just irony, I think there, but a humour.

There's a kind of absurd humour to that. The arbitrariness of image, the way that history gets written, the ways that he's a strong streak.

I think of the ridiculous of himself as this ox stumbling to the shambles and so on.

Not just undignified, but grotesque. There's a sense in which it's about that instability of image and changeable ness.

So how do we read it? He says, I do not defend my conduct.

I explain it. Is it humility or self-defence?

Apology or accusation that you get in the in this essay letter?

Um, he certainly and absolutely apologises for his own confesses and faces his own failings, those failings being compassion for Lord Alfred Douglas.

Sympathy. Generosity. Imagination.

Talent. Originality. He absolutely confesses to all of those.

And he also, importantly, condemns society's laws.

He says the laws under which I am convicted are wrong and unjust laws, and the system under which I have suffered a wrong and unjust system.

He declares the only sin he really committed, the only great and his greatest fault was turning to a society he did not respect,

whose laws he thought was wrong to defend himself,

so that bringing of the accusation against the bringing of the libel case against Queensberry was a turning to a society that he himself,

um, did not have faith in, um, and that he despised.

So throughout this work, you have a celebration of wealth and humility.

Um, leaving the whole obvious problem of such celebration. And he does it brilliantly so.

And one of the best, the most famous passages in the whole thing. He talks about what he's lost and about his own standing as a writer.

I was a man who stood in symbolic relations to the art and culture of my age.

The gods had given me almost everything I had genius, a distinguished name, high social position, brilliancy, intellectual daring.

I made art of philosophy and philosophy and art. I altered the minds of men and the colour of things.

There was nothing I said or did that did not make people wonder.

I took the drama, the most objective form known to art, and made it as personal, a mode of expression as the lyric or the sonnet.

At the same time that I widened its range and enriched its characterisation.

Drama, novel, poem in rhyme, poem in prose, subtle or fantastic dialogue.

Whatever I touched, I made beautiful in a new mode of beauty to truth itself.

I gave what is false no less than what is true as its rightful province,

and showed that the false and the true are merely forms of intellectual existence.

I treated art as a supreme reality and life as a mere mode of fiction.

I awoke the imagination of my century, so it created myth and legend around me.

I summed up all systems in a phrase and all existence in an epigram.

It's wonderful. It's also you will find bits of that quoted everywhere from tea towels to studies of ward to exam paper questions.

It's wild writing, in a sense. Not his own epitaph, but his own legend.

He talks about how the century spun myth and legend around him, and he creates it there.

It's a phenomenal. Within the essay, he doesn't just talk about his literary standing, he performs it.

So a large part of De Profundis, if I call the manuscript that is in a kind of loose way, a large part of it is art theory, a lot of it.

There's a lot of comment on books, ideas of art, um, summing up systems, looking at the relation between medieval systems of thought,

Renaissance systems of thought, ideas of, in effect, the artistic ideas that lead through to modernism.

He's remaking his own image and performing the person he still is, the person he wishes to be seen as through it.

So the essay is full of comments and art, art history, contemporary writing, the purpose, nature, and function of art.

More than that, I think it's his most daring manifesto for art and the artist.

So in it he builds on and develops ideas that are essential in the earlier essays and dialogues of intentions and in the soul of man under socialism.

So it's you can read it as a continuity of his earlier writings on art.

Really importantly, there is one thing that he recounts on that he changes his mind on, and that is in The Soul of Man under socialism.

He talks about how one shouldn't have sympathy with suffering,

that actually you should have sympathy with life's joys and pleasures and have sympathy with suffering is simply a form of, um.

Self is pointless. It's a kind of perversion is a way of killing off joy in life.

However, he revises his view as he is suffering in prison.

He thoroughly revises that and talks instead about suffering and pain as the ultimate route to self-knowledge and self-development.

The prisoners, he argues, recall themselves become themselves again in the moment of suffering.

It's also a very world in way of reversing the hierarchy.

So because suffering is what gives you depth and compassion and being in all sorts of ways, it makes the prisoners superior to the warders.

The prison is superior to the governors, superior to everybody else in that establishment of the prison.

Um, and together with that in but at the same time, he also takes a key element of the solar ban under socialism and develops it further.

And that is in Solomon under socialism. Wilde makes Christ the figure of, in some ways the ultimate artist.

In In the Soul of Man, he describes Christ doctrine not as know thyself, but be thyself.

So it's not just about self-knowledge, it's about self-realisation.

And he in, um, the prison manuscript, he develops and extends these ideas of Christ as the ultimate individualist and the supreme artist.

So in this manuscript you have Christ as in sympathy with criminals and outcasts.

He's the ultimate artist. Not only that, but the ultimate decadent artist, a romantic artist who finds beauty and love in everything.

Not just in the beautiful and the pure, in the innocent, but in everything.

So that imaginative sympathy, Wilde argues, is key to both love and art, and he makes Christ the embodiment of both.

A loving outsider, a prisoner, a sinner, a criminal.

Accepting all of those as they are.

So the romantic art that he names as embodying the soul of Christ encompasses not only Romeo and Juliet, A Winter's Tale,

the ancient manner of de la belle damsel mercy, but also Baudelaire's Lefler du Mal, The Flowers of Evil.

The Note of Pity in Russian novels. Verlaine and Valens poems, the quatre canto work of Burne-Jones and William Morris and Vargas.

Tannhauser. In other words, precisely the fleshly, decadent,

avant garde experimental art that the Moral Majority had railed at in the later decades of the 19th century.

And he makes that the art that realises Christ's imagination and Christ's love,

that's the the art that that becomes this kind of realisation of the true romantic artist.

And it's also, importantly, the art in association with which Wilde gained his status as a leading figure in the decadent art movement.

And that is no coincidence, for in this work world very, very clearly aligns himself with Christ.

So. As he argues, he parallels his society and that of Christ, making Christ into the.

Not an individualist, an artist and an excluded criminal martyred by his society.

So wild, writes, Christ's chief war was against the Philistines.

That is the war every child of light has to wage.

Philistinism was the note of the age and community in which he lived,

and the heavy inaccessibility to ideas that dull respectability, that tedious orthodoxy,

their worship of vulgar success, their entire preoccupation with a gross,

materialistic side of life, and their ridiculous estimate of themselves and their importance.

The Jew of Jerusalem in Christ's day, was the exact counterpart of the British Philistine of our own.

Christ mocked at the whited sepulchre of respectability and fixed that phrase forever.

So he's very neatly parallel, paralleling his own war with contemporary philistinism in art, with Christ's war with the Philistines of his day.

And so you have Walt as Christ here. Um, he's also just as the icing on the cake while this pope.

So in the instructions that he gives for the reliefs that the manuscript and its copying, he writes to Ross, if the copying is done at Honiton Street,

the lady typewriter might be fed through a lattice in the door, like the con cardinals, when they elect a pope,

till she comes out on the balcony and can say to the world habit, wonder that, Mr. Lamb?

For indeed it is an insight. Click a letter and there's the bulls of the Holy Father on named for their opening words.

It may be spoken of as a pistola incarcerate at Nicholas.

So he's basically likening. He's saying as the type is just copying this up.

This will be like the moment when you say, how about windows?

How the world has a pope. This becomes the world has a letter.

So it's he's turning his letter into this papal declaration.

Um, it's quite wonderful in that sense.

And so epistolary encounter evangelist, the title that Ian Small chooses, the whole manuscript is taking this as the title.

So it's a wonderful.

So, um, as Bernard Shaw commented of De Profundis, it is not wilde de profundis in the depths, it is Wilde in excelsis, Wilde in heaven in some ways.

So there's an extraordinary hotspot to this work. Quite extra.

And this is Wilde in prison. Losing his health will broken in all sorts of ways.

But not, um. It's the most extraordinary work of defiance in all sorts of ways.

And one way that you can read De Profundis, if I use that term of in in epistolary in culture, it being whatever you want to call it, that work.

One way of reading it is that it performs what it talks about.

So it talks about the power of art. It talks about art as the means of creating your realising yourself, realising life itself.

And he performs that in many ways in front of the reader in the course of it.

So he declares himself well, takes hold of himself in his life in the course of that work, and it remakes,

it takes himself that he will not simply be victim of fate, but rather author and creator of his own life and controller of its meaning.

So that theme running through it of the self as a work of art, of Christ and Christ's life as themselves, a work of art, and so on.

There's a sense throughout it of what society and the trials and its relationship with Douglas have done to him.

It's made him into a lesser work of art, a work of art in others hands that he says he thought his life was a comedy and he found it was a tragedy.

He talks about himself and the others, prisoners as in prison, dressed as like the zanies of sorrow.

They become kind of clowns on a stage. He describes the scene which research the found never, ever happened,

but the scene at which he was supposedly had to change trains Clapham Junction in the convict's

dress and was laughed at and jeered at and spat at by um passengers on the platform and so on.

So the way in which he's turned into this kind of spectacle and the spectacle of shame.

So he writes about the way in which somebody else has taken over and turned him into a lesser work of art.

And then he declares in the course of the letter that he will take back command, that it's his job to reshape his life.

So, as he says, I have got to make everything that has happened to me good for me.

There is not a single degradation of the body, which I must not try to make into a spiritual izing of the soul.

I want to get to the point when I shall be able to say, quite simply and without hesitation, that the two great turning points of my life.

Well, when my father sent me to Oxford, and when society sent me to prison.

And it's that that he undertakes in the course that transformation that he undertakes in the course of this work.

Well, it's an act of, well, taking hold of the narrative, becoming the shaping hand of his own story, determining its meaning, but never one meaning.

Multiple readers, multiple forms. Multiform is the way he sees identity.

And in that sense, what he's doing here, it's, I would argue for this to be read as as multiple a work as any of his other works.

It's a continuation of the earlier essays and intentions, um, and it performs a lot of what he talks about in intentions,

when he talks about the ways in which life imitates art more than art imitates life.

It's a kind of realisation of that. So those essays were published in 1891, in many ways at the height of his fame in 1895.

He loses all that in 1897 as he writes this.

He's in prison in disgrace. Bankrupt. He's lost.

Um, deprived even of his children. His mother dies.

His whole life has disappeared. But in De Profundis it's as much a manifesto as anything else.

It's an extraordinarily brave, subtle and complex manifesto that's as complex a work as his plays, novel, essays.

It's addressed to friends, public and posterity. It's also, I would argue, a wonderful act of self isolation and self-creation.

And it takes the reader through those moves and at the end declares the work as yet unfinished.

Do not be afraid of the past. If people tell you that is irrevocable, do not believe them.

The past and the present and the future are but one moment in the sight of God and His sight.

We should try to live. Time and space. Succession and extension.

A mere accidental conditions of thought. The imagination can transcend them and move in a free sphere of ideal existences.

Things also are, in their essence, what we choose to make them a thing is according to the mode in which one looks at it,

where others says, Blake, see the dawn coming over the hill?

I see the sons of God shouting for joy what seemed to the world and to myself my future.

I lost irretrievably when I let myself be taunted into taking the action against your father, had, I daresay, lost it really long before that.

What lies before me is my past. I have got to make myself look on that with different eyes, to make the world look on it with different eyes.

This I cannot do by ignoring it, or slighting it, or praising it or denying it.

It is only to be done fully by accepting it fully as an inevitable part of the evolution of my life and character.

By bowing my head to everything that I have suffered. How far I am away from the true temple of soul.

This letter and its changing, uncertain moods, its scorn and bitterness, its aspirations and its failure to realise those aspirations.

Show you quite clearly. Um. It's a wonderful.

It's a. Watch this work in progress. It's. This is about I.

And this work are about to turn into different things. There are wonderful moments of a kind of self-mockery in there as well.

He talks about he has no money, but that's fine. He will live under the stars and sleep in the straw like that's what he does.

Let's say he leaves. He immediately sets about ordering the very, very best soaps and the the finest wallet for the bit of money he has.

Um, there's no sleeping under the stars, so he kind of weaves these possible selves and then reworks them.

But what I'm offering you is a way of reading De Profundis, one way of reading De Profundis, which is this act of self-creation,

this celebration of the power of art, but in it a material for so many different wonderful works.

Its unstable, mutable, multiple, and use one of world's favourite words.

Suggestive. That's it. Thank you.

