[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
All right. Welcome. And thank you for coming through the rain.

Okay. Audience attendance figures have been very low today.

So welcome. And I hope you're not too soggy.

So. What people call sincerity is simply a method by which we can multiply our personalities.

So says Gilbert in The Critic as artist. And there's this following passage in The Picture of Dorian Grey.

Is insincerity such a terrible thing? I think not, it is merely the method by which we can multiply our personalities.

Such, at any rate, was Dorian Grey's opinion.

He used to wonder at the shallow psychology of those who conceived the ego in man as a things simple, permanent, reliable, and of one essence to him.

The man was a being with myriad lives and myriad sensations, a complex,

multiform creature that brought within itself strange legacies of thought and passion,

and whose very flesh was tainted with the monstrous maladies of the dead.

This is wild idea of the multiple mobile unfixed self, the self where insincerity,

performance, pretence, creation, deceit, um, fantasy, imagination, whatever form,

whatever labels you want to put on it is part of a is a mode of self-realisation,

is a part of the potential to become an individual, to realise oneself as an individual.

And it's this idea of performance as a mode of self-realisation.

It's also crucial in Walt's resistance, the idea of judgement and type.

That that idea of the multiple and flu itself also defies the notion that you can categorise human beings,

pathologize them, limit them within types, and then judge them.

Now. This fluidity is echoed in the narrative itself of The Picture of Dorian Grey.

So this is taken out of a much longer passage that starts with Lord Henry talking about the idea of how, um, the standard,

the, um, what society cares for and the importance, for example, of a good dinner over above everything else.

And the idea of this sort of self formation, which then turns into what seems to be a third person narrative insincerity, such a terrible thing.

Um, I think not, I think not, which then seems that the eye is a surprise.

And what seems to be a third person narrator. And then it turns into Dorian.

So this very fluidity and unfixed ness is there in the narrative voice itself and the narrative judgements and the narrative style.

So that goes back to what I was saying about this kind of shifting use of styles

and patterns of them that Walt uses to unsettle and challenge ideas of judgement,

and especially the idea of the normative.

So this concept of the mobile fluid self inventing self while takes it so far that later in the critic as artist,

you have Gilbert take on the idea of heredity.

So in some ways, if you have an idea of what's your essential self, what's the self that's given to you that you have to live with?

In some ways that the idea of heredity is one that fixes that.

Above all, what you've inherited, what you physically, biologically are, and world plays with it through Gilbert in the following way.

When he writes about the influence on individual, um, willpower,

an individual choice that heredity has by revealing to us the absolute mechanism of all action,

and so freeing us from the self-imposed and trembling burden of moral responsibility.

The scientific principle of heredity has become, as it were, the warrant for the contemplative life.

It has shown us that we are never less free than when we try to act.

It has hemmed us round with the nets of the hunter, and written upon the wall the prophecy of all doom.

We may not watch it, for it is within us. We may not see it.

Save in a mirror that mirrors the soul. It is nemesis without a mask.

It is the last of the fates and the most terrible. It is the only one of the gods whose real name we know.

And yet, while in the sphere of practical and external life, it has robbed energy of its freedom and activity, of its choice.

In the subjective sphere where the soul is at work.

It comes to us this terrible shadow with many gifts in its hands, gifts of strange temperaments and subtle sceptre susceptibilities,

gifts of wild orders and chill moods of indifference, complex,

multiform gifts of thoughts that are at variance with each other, and passions that war with against themselves.

And so it is not our own life that we live, but the lives of the dead and the soul that dwells within us.

It's no single spiritual entity making us personal and individual, created for our service and entering into us for our joy.

So what one performs here through Gilberte is the idea that heredity doesn't fix it.

Heredity may fix what you are in the sense of your.

So that turns it into like an idea of the Greek fates, that your heredity decides every thing in the sphere of action.

So give up now you can think, but you can't decide what you do.

Your body's done that. And then he.

Instead of making it an entrapment, he turns it into the idea that heredity also means that we have, we think, the thoughts of the dead.

He makes it into a kind of channel to lives outside your own,

in the kind of shared imagination and the shared memory and so on, that you get through that.

So it's a kind of turns into a sort of mystical psychological infinitude.

Uh, so it's what I mean, it's it's deliberately and framed in this dialogue.

It's a deliberately, um, provocative and extreme argument, but it's again, wild exploring these ways of understanding the multiple self.

Now performance, I would argue in in so many of worlds works and what's philosophy is intrinsic to free identity,

the freedom to create yourself, to become yourself, to be whatever kinds of selves you want to be.

But it's also importantly, a form of self-defence against a society that,

in the example I gave me from no doubt, is kind of pushing towards conformity, orthodoxy, normative ness, um,

and world rights in The Soul of Man Under socialism about these pressures of society enforced by public opinion,

by the family, by notions of duty, by moral precepts, by the violence of the law, courts and prisons, and so on.

Um, and in this older man under socialism, he offers a vision of the idea of the soul that is free to grow,

like a flower that grows organically if it is true to itself.

But importantly, that's a vision of the self that is only realisable or fits within the idea of a utopian society where you are finally anarchic,

free of all these forces. So it's very, very rare for a while to offer any kind of image of the soul or identity as single and organic,

in that that sort of simple form of, of, of truth or intrinsic ness.

Instead, the rest of the essay, he's dealing with a non non utopian society, the world as it is,

where he argues that the only choice you have in that society is either to knowingly

perform as a way of resisting what's being pushed upon you to parts or to the.

He argues that most people in society are unconsciously performing that conformity is a form of unconscious performance.

So he says that if societies aren't brutal so that you have to knowingly resist them,

then that if they disguise their authority and kindness and rewards,

then people in that case are less conscious of the horrible pressure that is being put upon them.

And so go through their lives in a sort of course comfort, like petted animals,

without ever realising that they are probably thinking other people's thoughts and living by other people's standards,

wearing practically what 1st May call other people's second hand clothes, and never being themselves for a moment.

So conformity becomes this kind of unconscious performance, simply moulding oneself into reproducing the norm.

Um, and this is the. And against that you have world's idea of the self delighting self creating, um,

expanding self which explores and extends and experiments and tries out different selves and where the line between the intrinsic and the extrinsic,

between the performer and the genuine is utterly unidentifiable.

In fact, based on a notion that in itself is highly questionable.

So he's not just confusing those categories, but asking questions about how invented, how or how valid they are in any way.

So in the world as world sees it, as he represents it in his works,

performance is an inevitable mode of living in society as he as um, he puts it in one of his letters in 1892, anybody can act.

Most people in England do nothing else. To be conventional is to be a comedian.

Now this notion of the mobile performed self is in sharp contrast.

Contrast to theatrical traditions of the 19th century, especially the theatrical tradition of melodrama.

So it's been argued, if you look at somebody like Peter Brooks, who's one of the main, um, his study of melodrama,

the melodramatic imagination, um, Balzac, Henry James melodrama in the mode of excess, which is one of the most important works on melodrama.

He argues that what you have within melodrama is essentially structured around revelation.

So huge number of melodramas have people falsely accused, have switched identities, have lost children, have all sorts of.

But, um, and the the end of melodrama, the sort of climax of melodrama is the revelation of truth, true identity,

the truth about in which false accusations are cleared off, in which people are returned to the right family, and so on.

Um, and there's a notion that actually this unveiling and recognition of vice and virtue is the melodramatic mode itself.

It's where in the sense melodrama as a way of thinking, replaces both church and state, um,

external structures that declare what is vice and virtue, and instead it becomes something that's in some ways individualised.

Um, it's a kind of Manichaean morality made manifest in melodrama.

So here, for example, Peter Brookes argues that in melodrama, nothing is spared because nothing is left unsaid.

The characters stand on stage and utter the unspeakable, give voice to their deepest feelings,

dramatised through their heightened and polarised words and gestures, the whole of their relationship.

Life tends in this fiction towards ever more concentrated and totally expressive gestures and statements.

Now melodrama is one of the modes that Wilde is drawing on in all his plays.

You've got those endless fallen women, you've got the secrets that then come out.

You've got the lost children, you've got the unmarried mothers who, you know,

kind of declare, um, their maternity and, you know, confront seducer and so on.

You that revelation of these hidden secrets is a standard part of Wilde's dramatic structure, but it tends to happen in the second act.

So that what you haven't got necessarily is denouement that follows that denouement being the French for and knotting new to, not in French.

Instead you have a kind of re not so there's revelation,

but how that relates to identity or selfhood is in many ways further complicated in the following acts,

so that you not ending with the revelation of a single truth, but rather the complication, the very notion.

Now, this is in contrast to so many plays of the period of the 1880s and 1990s those endless fallen woman plays by Arthur Wing Pinero,

by Henry Arthur Jones, by Sidney Grundy, and so on. Um, where the fallen woman, the woman who's had sex outside of marriage, is identified,

labelled, and in almost every case expelled or at the very least humiliated.

So it's the sexual sin is known and labelled, and the impulse to know and to label is absolutely crucial to those plays.

Now, that is another country theatrical influence that Wilde's interacting with.

So he's interacting with so many different theatrical influences.

Bring them together. He's a great, in one sense, a great plagiarist.

He nicked stuff from everywhere and then make something new from it in conversation with the original.

So one of the other central influences is Ibsen, Henrik Ibsen.

So in 1889, so the first professional production of A doll's House on the London stage.

And by 1891, that's just one year before.

Later, Wyndham is found. Appears on stage. In 1891, on the London stage appeared Rossum's home, Hedda Gabler.

Ghost and the lady from the sea.

So Ibsen kind of really arrives in that side, and it never becomes really it doesn't become really big box office, but he's very much alive.

In The case of ghosts, it's a private theatre society performance.

It's not a public performance,

but Ibsen is absolutely kind of arriving in England as a major influence at this point and making so much of the theatre just look old fashioned.

So it's not gathering huge audience in itself, but it changes the stakes.

And it's not just the challenging subject matter of Ibsen's plays.

The wife who walks out on her husband and children to realise a greater duty to herself, or ghosts dealing with sexually transmitted disease.

Um, it's the ways in which the plays have these layered and undefined and in many ways, mobile characters.

So Ibsen works again on a lot of the well-made play structure of The Hidden Secret that then comes back, whether it's something like Nora's,

um, forging of the Czech, which then comes to the surface and, um, the attempt to blackmail her on it, and so on.

It's also the idea that, um, these are people whose individual conscience and individual self is moulded by the society around them.

When the individual's needs and individual morality can actually be in conflict with their society.

But where there's a constant negotiation, where there are layers and layers of pretence,

and some of that pretence is conscious and much of it is unconscious.

How far people in those plays have moulded themselves to be the people that the society around them wants them to be?

And so in A doll's House, which is kind of the classic example, Nora,

who wakes to the sense that she has become the doll that her father wanted her to be in,

the husband wants to be that she's played quite consciously the role of songbird and the flippity gibbet,

and the one who's spendthrift when actually she's working for the money.

But when she casts that off, it remains uncertain who she is.

And how far at the end of the play, as she walks out into the dark at something like 2 a.m.

And this is the dark in Scandinavia, so it's going to carry on for really a lot of hours after that.

That's not necessarily the adult sorted, intelligent woman walking out.

She still in some ways playing quite a tragic role. Or, you know, there's a big back door slam.

Have you ever had an argument in which you have slammed a door at the end? And is that not a bit of a gesture when one does it?

So there's a very interesting way in which the performance has not ended, that she has not cast off the roles.

There's a question about who she's becoming.

With that vision at the end that she and Torvald may become a real marriage, but it's the she doesn't yet know who she is.

So that's one of the that's the real Ebsen revolution in many ways.

Is this not just the stark and challenging subject matter, but the indeterminacy,

the ways in which judgement itself is problematise and questions about who people are?

Now all the characters in world's plays are constantly performing.

Some know it. Many don't. And those who know it who are consciously performing are characters like Mrs. Lin and Lady Windermere's Fan.

Um, who emphasises performance itself, talks about, you know, the role she won't play because she'd have to wear an ugly dress and all the rest of it.

Um, and she refuses to be pinned down at the end of that play into the role of the self-sacrificing mother or of the Scarlet Woman,

and she walks out of the play. Because England is a is a place of confining roles.

But you can think of so many other self-conscious performers within world's plays.

Mrs. Allen being the woman, you know, important. Um. Mrs.

Chiefly in an ideal husband, Lord Illingworth, lady Plymouth Dales, Cecil Graham there are an all of these are often identified as dandies,

as characters who are self-aware stylists who are performing themselves.

They're also insider outsiders.

They they're not excluded from society, but they're observers from within who are analysed and satirise and question the society they inhabit,

that commentators are neither fully detached nor fully committed.

But performance is also detectable in characters who've imbibed social standards, who have become,

who've taken on, whereas Mrs. Berlin rejects the punitive standards of her of her society.

Mrs. Arbuthnot, in a one importance, seems to have internalised them,

so she excludes herself from polite society because she's supposedly not worthy to be.

She's got a reputation as incredibly good woman, precisely because she simply looks after the ill, and the second lives this very moral life.

At the same time is talking about the way in which she's been excluded.

So she's not been actively excluded. She has excluded herself in some way.

And you then have this speech, this fabulous speech, which I'm just giving you part of.

It's a very, very long speech, which is the point where she rejects the notion of marriage to the father of her child,

and she turns on her son, who is saying, this is obviously what you must do.

You know, I've asked him to marry you. And you get the following speech.

We're giving you part of it. Men don't understand what mothers are.

I am no different from other women except in the wrong done me and the wrong I did, and my very heavy punishments and disgrace.

And yet to bear you, I had to look on death to nurture you.

I had to wrestle with it. And then she goes and then goes into the ways in which he's a boy.

And so he grows up, and he left a behind, and he made all these friends. You made friends and went into their houses, and we lived with them.

And I, knowing my secret, did not dare to follow, but stayed at home and closed the door, shut out the sun, and sat in darkness.

What should I have done in honest households? My past was ever with me and you thought I didn't care for the pleasant things of life.

I tell you I longed for them, but did not dare touch them, feeling I had no right.

You thought I was happier working amongst the poor. That was my mission.

You imagined it was not. But where else was I to go?

The sick do not ask if the hand that smooths that pillow is pure.

No. The dying care of the lips that touch their brow have known the kiss of sin.

It was you I thought of all the time I gave to them. The love you did not need.

Lavished on them a love that was not yet theirs.

And you thought I spent too much of my time in going to church and in church duties, but where else could I turn?

God's house is the only house where sinners are made welcome.

And you were always in my heart, Gerald. Too much in my heart.

For through day though, day after day at morn and song I have knelt in God's house.

I have never repented of my sin. How could I repent of my sin when you, my love, were its fruit?

Even now that you are bitter to me, I cannot repent, I do not.

You are more to me than innocence. I would rather be your mother.

Oh, much, rather than have always been pure. Oh, don't you see?

Don't you understand? It is my dishonour that has made you so dear to me.

It is my disgrace that is bound you so closely to me.

It is a price I have paid for you the price of soul and body that makes me love you as I do.

Oh, don't ask me to do this horrible thing. Child of my shame.

Be still, child of my shame. So where's the roll?

And where's the true woman? It's utterly impossible to tell.

She talks about the role she played, the role of the repentant sinner, how she looked after the sick and went to church.

But her heart was not there. But the notion of guilt, the notion of dishonour is deeply embedded in her.

She speaks in a very in so many religious images.

So she's imbibed that she's. Is she playing the role because it makes her a victim?

Is there an element of consciousness in there? Is that the power she has over her son?

Has she? Is she torn between an instinctive rejection of a guilt that she has also deeply internalised?

She's an intense study in the damage that sexual judgement plays, that sexual morality plays.

But where she is within that and what she's wielding and what she genuinely believes, it's very, very hard to tell in any way.

There's not a separation in those and that's signalled in the language uses and well, does that.

So in one sense, it's an incredibly melodramatic speech with this kind of heightened biblical religious language.

In another sense, it's a it's a religious moral speech that's expressing absolute opposite.

I don't give a toss about the sick. I didn't care about the poor.

I didn't care about religion. I only cared about you. It's an incredibly original speech, but offered in a different kind of heightened language.

So the relation between style and subject matter is deeply problematic in lots of ways.

And it's one of the reasons, if you read through, um, or see A Woman of No Importance, it's been likened to the scream franchise.

Um, but one critic, Francesca Copper, with the idea that it's a horror in the way that Scream the Scream franchise are horror

films about horror films that are kind of playing off the tropes in the same way that,

say, Quentin Tarantino is film about film in the same way, this is a kind of self-conscious play about plays.

Um, there's a way in which it's sort of stylistically playing with that question of what's the relation between surface and substance,

and how do you judge within that? So as various characters declare in Wilde's plays, style, not sincerity is the vital thing,

as Gwendoline says in The Knight, in The Importance of Being Earnest or manners before morals,

my dear Windermere, as Mrs. Olin said in Lady Windermere's Fan,

that question of the relation between surface and depth, between matters of moral style and sincerity.

It's one of the questions that all of Wilde's plays pose.

It's one of the challenges in trying to analyse them so, and it's very easy to just get stuck on the surface.

And in that sense, even using the image of surface and depth, it's using an image that's questionable about the place themselves,

how far the surface is, the depth that actually they challenge that notion of, um, a, um, a face behind the mask.

The ways in which the mask is the face is part of the kind of questions that world's posing.

So rather than just leave you with all of that,

I thought I further complicate it by going into one play in particular for what lies under the surface.

What kind of games is it playing? What is it engaging with and challenge. So an ideal husband is the play.

I propose to do that with, um, hands up. Anybody who doesn't know an ideal husband and would like a plot summary.

Okay, I'll go for a plot summary on the basis that it does no harm that even if you've read the play, say first in seatbelts.

See if I can do it. Um, I haven't got this written down. So, um.

An Ideal Husband opens in Sir Robert Chilton's expensive house, where it's a political reception.

He is the undersecretary for foreign affairs, um, in the British government.

And it's a political reception with all sorts of lords and ladies arriving and Mrs. chiefly,

who's a kind of international, uh, schema operator and heavily involved in finance.

And she says to Sir Robert Chilton, who is a politician with a great reputation for morality, um,

and integrity, she asks him to invest, to invest in her Argentine canal scheme and to back it.

And he says, absolutely not. You forget, you know, this, this is simply a stock exchange swindle.

And she says, I will offer you a lot of money to back the scheme.

And he says, you forget you are talking to an English gentleman.

And she says, I remember that. I am talking to a man who made his fortune and his reputation by selling a cabinet secret for money.

And so Robert says, it was all very, very complicated in his particular politics and so on.

And she says, let us call things by their proper name. It was a swindle.

So she throws back his words on himself and she says, I can ruin you with this letter I have that you wrote to Baron on selling this cabinet secret.

And he then agrees to back the Argentine canal scheme.

Elsewhere in this party, um, his friend Lord Goring discovers, um, a brooch that somebody left and he pockets it, telling Mabel Chilton.

So Robert's younger sister, with whom he is flirting, not to let anybody know that he's done that.

Um. And the act ends with Sir Robert's telling his wife that he's backing the Argentine canal scheme and his very immoral wife,

Lady Chiltern, saying, no, you are above this.

You don't do. Other, lesser politicians do things like this. You are noble.

And that is why I love you and gets him to write a letter to Mrs. cheerfully rejecting the scheme.

Next act, uh, begins with Sir Robert despairing about what's going to happen to his career as he talks to his friend Lord Goring,

and Goring advises him to be open about the whole thing. And Sir Robert says no.

And Goring says, I never realised he was so weak as to give in to temptation.

And so Robert says, no, there is a strength and a courage involved in giving into temptation.

And he says, I was not weak. I fought the century with its own weapons and won.

What this century worships is wealth. It must have wealth.

And he explains, that's how he got wealth, which gave him power over people and gave him the career that he has.

Um, and so. And Goring promises to try and help him and back him.

You then have Mrs. chiefly arrives and Lady Chiltern is very, very rude to her and Mrs. cheerfully then says,

you know throws back the kind of moral scorn being thrown at her by saying what you don't.

You know that your husband's career was built on selling a cabinet secret.

This whole all the wealth you have was built on that.

And Lady Chiltern turned to her husband and tell me it's not true. And he says, you have ruined me.

You who I love so well, the reason that I couldn't buy back my past and that I now face ruin and ends with lady two.

The act ends with Lady Chiltern in tears on the sofa, um, having been condemned by her husband.

Next act, Lord Goring Rooms. Um. He expects a visit, um, with the visits coming from his father, Lord Caversham, and from Sir Robert.

But he's received a letter from Lady Chiltern in the meanwhile, saying I want you, I need you.

I am coming to you, Gertrude. They are old friends and he's offered her help, and she now turns to him for help.

And he says, very uncomfortable, that she's coming to visit, a point where her husband is there and all the rest of it,

and ask the butler to send her into a quiet room at the back.

Um, Sir Robert comes in, but what Goring doesn't realise is that Mrs. Chiefly has arrived and been sent into that room.

So, as Sir Robert is saying, what do I do with my career? The marriage is in ruins.

Um, a noise is heard in the other room from Mrs. Chiefly moving around and some and Lord Goring, thinking that it is Lady Chiltern,

says the woman in there is is faultless you he she she's an entirely noble woman.

So Robert then goes and sees it's Mrs. Chiefly and storms out,

accusing his friend of having betrayed him, and Mrs. chiefly comes out very pleased with herself,

and offers Lord Goring to return to hand over to him the blackmail letter that incriminate um so Robert in return for him marrying her.

And Lord Goring says, no, I don't believe in self-sacrifice, very, very bad for people.

Um, and in their conversation, Mrs. Chiefly reveals that she went that she lost a brooch at that party.

And Lord Goring says, I have the brooch here. And so it's actually it's a bracelet and fastens.

It's onto her arm. Um. Mrs. Cheerfully then, you know, doesn't realise it's a bracelet.

And Lord Goring says, and I know you stole it, and I'm going to report you to the police chief.

He said, well, just take it off. And did I know anything about it? But she can't find the secret cat.

She can't get it off. At which point she agrees to exchange the blackmail letter for the bracelet.

Um. Lord Goring then burns the blackmail letter.

Um, but Mrs. chiefly in the meanwhile, spots the letter from Lady Chiltern saying, I want you, I need you,

I'm coming to get to you, Gertrude, and says she can see that's poor Sir Robert has been betrayed by his wife, and that he will.

She steals this letter and declares she's going to deliver it somewhere.

But Chilton. Final act. Um. Lady Chiltern is delighted to hear that her husband's blackmail letter has been burnt,

but horrified to learn that her letter, still goring as it has been stolen, is being seen as a love letter.

Um. Her husband then enters, delighted with the letter, saying, and it's been delivered to him by the secretary out of its envelope.

So he reads, I want you, I need to I'm coming to you, Gertrude, as a letter to himself.

And his wife then pretends it is indeed a letter to himself, to him and the reconciled.

He has made a great speech in house condemning the Argentine canal scheme.

He is offered a seat in the cabinet, but as his wife looks at him with unclear eyes,

he then agrees to rip up the letter, accepting the seat in the cabinet because he is unworthy of it.

At which point Lord Goring takes Lady Chiltern aside and delivers a speech about how a man's life is of more value than a woman's,

and a woman's progresses on curves of emotion, whereas into the long lines of intellect the man's life progresses,

and therefore her only job is to love her husband and let him realise his ambition and not ruin his life for him.

She then repeats this speech to her husband and rips up his resignation letter,

at which point Sir Robert turns Lord Goring and says, what can I do for you?

I'm in your debt. And and Lord Goring says, well, you can let me marry you or your sister Mabel.

At which point Sir Robert says no, because he thinks that little Goring is having an affair with missus, chiefly,

at which point Lady Chiltern faces up to the fact that the letter was not written to her husband, but rather that it was written to Lord Goring.

And Sir Robert says, how could you think I would ever suspect you?

To me you are the pure image of all good things, and sin can never touch you.

And they are reconciled. And the play ends with him saying, do you love?

Is it love or pity? You feel for me? And she says, it is love only there you have the plot.

Um, right now I can go back to my notes.

Having done that, um, what you have there is a plot that combines is a play that compliance combines high class intrigue.

Financial misdemeanours that go right to the heart of government. So it ends with Sir Robert in the heart of the British government, in the cabinet.

It's a play that contains questions of a woman's life, what a woman's love is like in a man's life.

All sorts of questions about how you judge a man's life and a woman's life.

It's a play in which the villain, the villainous Mrs. Chiefly, is very deliberately paralleled with the supposed hero,

Sir Robert Chilton, so that all sorts of things in this play that are deeply destabilising.

It's a multi-layered melodrama of blackmail.

It's got the whole complexity of the brooch that becomes a bracelet with a hidden catch and so on.

It offers this kind of high class political intrigue, glimpses into corridors of power,

together with Wilde's characteristic sophisticated verbal wit and these kind of

questions about public morality and private morality and how they relate to each other.

So all those different threads are bound together in the play. And the way that these threads combined puzzled plenty of reviewers at the time.

So in Like a Joke home magazine that the reviewer commented as follows.

The story, which presumably is adapted from The Family Herald,

which is a reference to what Wilde said about importances plots being borrowed from the Family Herald.

It's so full of high class virtue and vice that the gallery is kept in a state of subdued enthusiasm,

while the stalls are puzzling over the paradoxes. But it requires a pit to appreciate the depth of dramatic talent.

And that pit, unfortunately, is wanting at the Haymarket Theatre. If some accomplished, accomplished dramatist Mr. G.

Simms, for instance, would only straighten out Mr. World's English into robust intelligibility.

An audience on the Surrey side might enjoy the familiar flavour of this genteel melodrama.

So you've got a sense there of playing to different layers in the theatre,

playing to the cheap seats with the melodrama, planning to the expensive seats with the paradoxes and so on.

You also have a wild on this idea of who's the play written for,

played with the interviews in the kind of characteristic way with his question of what public he was written for.

So, um. Uh, Gilbert Burgess an interview asked, what is your feeling towards your audiences, towards the public?

And wild response. Which public? There are as many publics as there are personalities.

Burgess tries again. Are you nervous on the night you're producing a new play?

Oh, no. I am exquisitely indifferent. My nervousness ends at the last dress rehearsal.

I know then what affect my new play is presented upon. The stage has produced upon me.

My interest in the play ends there, and I feel curiously envious of the public.

They have such wonderful, fresh emotions in store for them. I laughed, but Mr. Wilde rebuked me with a look of surprise.

It is the public, not the play, that I desire to make a success, he said.

We shall never have a real drama in England until it is recognised that a play is as personal and individual,

a mode of a form of expression as a poem or a picture.

So this is world making the play something that is playing to all.

As many publics as there are personalities. It's something multiple and uncertain, as well as provocatively private.

Something between himself, um, that is written to entertain.

So what was the impact of the play on these public's. Well, reviews are massively, um, confused when it comes to the morality of the play.

So, for example, a review and Pick Me Up declared that Lady Chiltern is depressingly good all the time,

good enough to drive an ordinary husband to drink from sheer monopoly of the cardinal virtues.

I shall always think kindly of a great public man in the future,

if I hear he has been suddenly found out to have been all along a masterpiece of moral error.

I shall put his drawbacks down to the fact that he must have an abnormally good wife.

And Abby Walkley, one of the leading theatrical critics of the day,

wrote in The Speaker that the play's more or less the great thing is not to be found out.

The whole play is designed to fill us with joy of the escape of a sinner from the penalty of his sin.

So a trick with a diamond bracelet. So there's a real unease about what is the moral to this play.

How it's playing out, either producing these kind of much more original moral responses and reviews than it used to,

or actually condemning the play for its, um, the, the perversity of its moral ending.

I think one of the best reviews of the play was by Bernard Shaw, who writes very long review.

This is a chunk of it where I think he gets the essence of the play in a really interesting way.

So he declared in the Saturday Review, in a certain sense, Mr. Wallace to me, are only thorough playwrights.

He plays with everything, with wit, with philosophy, with drama, with actors and audience, with the whole theatre.

Mr. Wilde, an arch artist, is so colossally lazy that he trifles even with the work by which an artist escapes work,

he distils the very quintessence and gets his product plays, which also.

So unapproachable. Playful. They are the delight of every play goer with two pennyworth of brains.

The English critic always protesting that the drama should not be didactic and yet always complaining.

If the dramatist does not find sermons in stones and good in everything, will be conscious of a subtle and pervading levity in an ideal husband.

He is shocked to the danger to the foundations of society when seriousness is publicly laughed at, and to complete the oddity of the situation.

Mr. Wilde, touching what he himself references, is absolutely the most sentimental dramatist of the day.

And, as show concludes, it is useless to describe a play that has no thesis, which is in its purest integrity, a play and nothing else.

The six worst epigrams on their arms, handed with a kind smile to the average suburban playground.

The three best remain secrets between Mr. Wilde and a few choice spirits.

The modern note is struck,

and so Robert Chilton's assertion of the individuality and courage of his wrongdoing as against the mechanical stupidity of his stupidly good wife,

and in his bitter criticism of a love that is only the reward of merit.

It is the philosophy on which the scene is based, that is the most pregnant epigrams in the plays have been condensed.

Indeed, this is the only philosophy that has ever produced epigrams.

So bound up in those reviews are some of the moral problems of the play.

The question about so the happy ending brings a seller of cabinet secrets, and a man who has not just once sold his soul to Stock Exchange secrets,

a cabinet secret for money, but was ready to do so again to protect his own career.

Um, that he becomes into the heart of the British government, and it's spoken of in the play as a possible future prime minister.

Um, and yet a number of reviewers are end up sort of sympathising with Sir Robert Chilton and or uneasy with the play.

So, well, plays with this idea of the hero's criminal.

So Robert specifically doesn't repent, but talks about his criminality as a fighting back against a corrupt system with its own weapons,

and is indeed paralleled with the villainous you have Lord Goering's dandy esque philosophy of being trivial and idle.

So he seems to be the kind of playing with ideas dandy in the play, but he then turns serious and indeed gets involved in political affairs.

Um, he might. Earlier in the play, he criticises Sir Robert Chilton's philosophy of the ultimate power is the power over the people.

This is what he says he's learned from Byron on him, and Lord Goring challenges that dismisses it as a thoroughly shallow creed.

But importantly, as Sir Robert points out, he was born with money.

So it's a Robert Chilton was born with ambition and no money, whereas lingering was born into that establishment.

So it's all very well for him to talk in those terms, because he has all the money and power he could possibly want given to him.

So he's a sort of insider in another way. Then you have Lady Chilton, and here you have her, as played by Julia Nielsen over there.

This is in the middle is Mrs. Chiefly. And this is Lord Goring here.

So that's Lord and Lady Chilton there. These are photos from the first production.

You've got Lady Chilton as this idealising force. So in the play, she's, you could say, um, educated out of her idealism, out of this sort of, um,

absolute judgements that she starts with, which is a common trajectory for a lot of women within Wilde's plays.

But the question of whether that's an abandonment of any kind of principle in public life,

whether she's standing by a corrupt husband or whether she remains a moral force looking at him, is very uncertain within the play.

So whether the end of the play has the Chilton's marriage, his performance alone for the public consumption,

or whether there's a sense in which Sir Robert has made some kind of moral progress in the play that's absolutely left between the lines.

That's off stage. That's for you to decide.

And importantly, there are two film versions of this play, one by Alex Korda, director Alex Call to the other by Oliver Parker in both of those films.

But insert a scene in the House of Commons in which Sir Robert Chilton condemns the Argentine canal scheme in terms that are

all about finding one's conscience and the start of a new life and the start of a different moral standard for the country,

but also, by implication, for himself.

So in both of those films, they tell you through that scene that Sir Robert is a good man and has good principles.

None of that is in Wilde's play.

You get the fact that he's given a speech in the house condemning the Argentine canal scheme, but that's from Lord Caversham.

Reading a report in The Times, which then talks of him as a much more moral politician than the than the corrupt politicians of other countries.

So you get that detail in a heavily ah, and nice little snippet.

It doesn't tell us why he gave that speech or who he really is in any way.

Now, some of the reviewers referred to one reviewer in the sketch referred to Lady Chilton as, quote, a petticoat Torvald helmer.

So Torvald Hellman being Nora Hellman's husband in, um, A doll's House, with the idea in the implication of that,

that Lady Chilton is the one who's sort of holding Sir Robert captive and forcing him to become the ideal that she wants.

Different critics have seen the players either feminist or anti-feminist.

So you can see it as feminist in the sense that Lady Chilton is.

She's a member of the Women's Lib Liberal Association.

She is a supporter of factory acts, female inspectors, the eight hours bill.

Those are those are absolutely core compassionate legislation,

the Liberal government legislation that's about so female inspectors are female inspectors in women's prisons,

factory acts of the Act's limiting child labour laws.

Um labour hours. Um these are these are compassionate politics that she's involved in.

So you have a woman who's involved in politics and causes that world himself absolutely believes in.

But at the beginning of the play, a point when she's disapproving of her husband back in the Argentine canal scheme.

Um, he tries to push back on that, saying it's all very complicated, dear, and private morality and public morality of different things.

So it's a classic. Go back to your little sphere, darling. You don't understand.

And at that point, he is speaking.

I mean, he's talking hokum because he's trying to get her out and trying to commit his, you know, sell the country for a second time.

So the play in that point seems to criticise separate spheres and the language and thought of separate spheres.

And in the stage direction where Robert first enters,

he's described in stage directions as the firmly chiselled mouth and chin contrast strikingly with the romantic expression in the deep set eyes.

The variance is suggestive of an almost complete separation of passion and intellect,

as though thought and emotion were each isolated in its own sphere through some violence of willpower.

So this division in Sir Robert, between passion and intellect, between um, thought and emotion, seems to be the split in him between,

in a sense, his moral sense and his ambition, his trying to, by force of will, hold private life and public life separate.

And the question of whether, through the play these two have come together, and whether that separation,

which seems to be symbolic of a kind of male sphere and female sphere or private sphere in public sphere,

is part of what's damaging to public life and damaging to national life.

This kind of separation at the same time as Lord Goring speech at the end that persuades

um Lady Tilton to allow her husband into government reasserts exactly that division.

A man's life is of more importance than a woman, a woman's life.

It triggers some curves of emotion, a man's on lines of intellect. So is that meant to be the truth of the play?

It's a speech in which Lord Goring validates Sir Robert Chilton's ambition,

something that is seen as a corrupting force and is about an ambition to have power over other people,

something in something like the Soul of man and socialism. Wilde completely condemns the power over other people as a distortion of other lives.

Everybody should be free to realise themselves as they wish. In other words, no two speeches in this play add up.

You cannot identify a single. Sorry, a line through there.

What Wald is doing is engaging with issues that are still baffling, challenging, questioning us.

On what level of probity do you require in your public figures?

If you require absolute and unquestioning probity, they are all open to blackmail.

They are all reachable. If you're accepting too much potential faults, are you debasing the currency?

Are you allowing personal interests and corruption into the heart of government?

So while absolutely engaging with those questions to which there are no simple answers,

and it's the play is putting female idealism up against male idealism.

What about Sir Robert's final, you know, kind of lying to his wife, saying,

you are to me the white image of all good things and sin can never touch you.

If anybody's on a pedestal. It seems like Chilton has been put on a pedestal by her husband.

So there are lots of speeches in the play about man's love and a woman's love,

each of which seemed to serve the interests of the man that makes them at that point.

So are they validated by the play or are they questioned by the play in that sense?

And they're I think Shaw's review is so useful.

The idea that that play plays with ideas. Think of that quote from an um, from De Profundis about the Oxford Temple,

um, which plays I with ideas rather than arriving at the violence of opinion.

Merely. There's a sense in which Wilde uses the dialogic form to put all these ideas in play.

Leaving you to work out between all of that what it adds up to where you stand on these matters, how you're negotiating them.

Uh, there's all the way through the play. There's also the ways in which it's about surface.

It's about image that the for all the uncertainty within the play of how to judge.

It's also a play in which, um, there's no concrete truth and in which image is the most important thing.

Now, this society. And I'll come back to its values. This city, Sir Robert Chilton, is the criminal within in one sense.

So you can try reading the play and alongside all sorts of other Walden works which have the criminal as hero.

So The Canterville Ghost, um, pen, pencil and poison without Arthur Southall's crime.

Um, you can think of again the soul of man and socialism, where he parallels, um, criminals with Christ.

The idea that in a in a world of corrupt laws, breaking the laws is, in a sense, the only moral thing to do.

So in the Soul of Man and Socialism, you have the following disobedience in the eyes of anyone who has read history.

It's man's original virtue. It is through disobedience that progress has been made through disobedience and through rebellion.

Sometimes the poor are praised for being thrifty, but to recommend thrift to the poor is both grotesque and insulting.

Man should not be ready to show that he can live like a badly fed animal.

He should decline to live like that, and should either steal or go on the rights, which is considered by many to be a form of stealing.

As for begging it, it's safer to beg than to take, but it is finer to take than to beg.

No, a poor man who is ungrateful, um, thrifty, discontented, and rebellious is probably a real personality and has much in him.

He is, at any rate, a healthy protest. I can quite understand the man accepting the laws that protect private property and admit of its accumulation,

as long as he himself is able, under those conditions, to realise some form of beautiful and intellectual life.

But it is almost incredible to me now how a man whose life is marred and made hideous by such laws can possibly acquiesce in their continuance.

So that's an argument for stealing rather than begging for going on the rates, i.e. living on benefits if you have to,

but actually better than that to steal in a corrupt system of private property.

But can you use that to figure Sir Robert Chilton, who, yes,

wants wealth and says what my what the what that society worships is wealth, but he himself wants wealth to perpetuate that system.

He's part of it. He's at the heart of it and using it. Or is he?

You could argue, though, there's no scientific in the play using that wealth to fight against that system.

There's little sign of that. So where you position him as a criminal?

Very questionable. On how far he's become part of the society he critiques.

Then you have the fact that he and he becomes part of the society in a way that

you might find very useful looking at Bernard Shaw's play with his houses.

Um, or indeed Mrs. Warren's Profession plays,

in which you have characters who critique as victims of society, who then become complicit in that society,

and ends of the plays in which there's no clearing of the air,

there's no stepping outside and destruction of what's been revealed as a corrupt system.

Everything in the play is also mobile and uncertain.

So whether it's the letter I want to, I need to, I'm coming to Gertrude, which is addressed, in effect,

to three different plays and three different people, and write in three different ways between them.

In the course of the play, you have the speeches which are uncertain how to take them and how to understand them.

You have to break the brooch that becomes a bracelet. Things morph within that play very, very hard to pin down that about.

And this idea of moral ambiguity has echoed in the idea throughout the play of surface and performance.

Everybody in that play is performing to everybody else. Mrs.

Chiefly is the one who wears a new scandal like a new hat in the park.

Um, she knows how to play that game like so many of those kind of dandies in those plays.

So there's a sense in which it's a it's a society of image and importantly, oops.

There is, uh, there's so much product placement in that first production.

These are gowns by worth. They were extraordinarily expensive.

This is like couture on stage, together with the expense of all the setting and everything else.

But it's a play in which all that money is explicitly tied to corruption.

So. And again the detail of the stage sets. Florence Alexander, who is married to George Alexander, who played Sir Robert Chilton.

She went on set to rearrange the furniture, do the final flower arrangements, and then went and sat in the box.

Um, so the set is treated like a rich drawing room.

It's an echo of. And we're talking when when the reviews talk about the sort of social tiers in the audience,

the top social tier in the audience, not sitting up in the gods.

That's the cheap seats, but sitting in the major private boxes in the stalls.

They included cabinet ministers. They included Lord Rothschild of the bankers Rothschild.

They included the prime minister.

So that echoing back that's happening while is also playing off, as he said in his curtain speech to Lady Windermere's Fan.

Ladies and gentlemen, I have enjoyed this evening immensely.

The actors have given us a charming rendition of a delightful play, and your appreciation has been most intelligent.

I congratulate you on the.

