[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
Can wait for the very helpful guy who came to get the handouts to get back to his seat, because it seems mean to catch him out on that one.

Um, in the meanwhile, one small apology if you got round to reading the lecture guide.

Um, it promised video clips, but the new technology in this building is to doing DVD clips because apparently that's old technology.

So I will eventually work out how I can integrate the video stuff into, um, into the state of the art technology that doesn't do that stuff.

But apologies, it is false advertising. So Oscar Wilde, Victorian and modernist.

So Wilde was born in 1854 and died in 1900 at the very end of the century.

And his first works are published in the late 1880s, and the last one is published in 1898.

So in that sense he spans in many ways the end of the Victorian period and the beginning of modernism.

And he's got a foot in both camps.

And I think what I'd like to talk about today is the way in which you can understand his works, as in conversation with Victorian ism,

in conversation with all sorts of literary conventions and expectations and the way that he uses those,

and seeing him as a kind of midwife to modernism, helping give birth to those new movements,

loosening things up so that, um, new forms and experimentation can emerge.

So Wilde, for both his admirers and detractors,

for both those who admired experimentation and those who were scared of it, stood in many ways for the fantasy.

At the end of the century, he was.

He stood for decadence, decay, corruption, exhaustion, degeneration, or, conversely,

for questioning, liberation, individualism, expansion, experimentation, innovation, exoticism.

He was hugely associated. He's very, very clever at associating himself with literary movements.

It's almost like he knows how to catch the wave as it's building and hop off before it crashes.

Um, so his early poetry is in imitation of what in the 1870s was kind of state of the art,

which was the fleshly school of poetry, Pre-Raphaelite ism and so on.

And this poetry of people like Swinburne,

who's an enormous influence on Wilde through to his association with and championing of aestheticism and then decadence,

then symbolism, and in many ways moving into Impressionism.

So Wilde was associated by many of the critics at the time as, as he said,

I stood in symbolic relation to the art and culture of my age, and that's exactly where he's positioned at the time.

So to give you a sense of what well, the sort of language and thought around fantasy Eckler was perfect.

Example is this book degeneration, written in German in 1892, as in tartan by the critic and thinker Max nodal, and translated into English in 1895.

It went through eight editions within two years,

so it's hugely popular and no doubt is almost neurotically scared of the changes that are coming with the end of the century.

So his definition of, um, the fantasy is of what he sees as generation this, this some.

This dusk of mankind. It means a practical emancipation from traditional discipline, which theoretically is still in force, to the voluptuous.

This means unbridled lewdness, the unchanging of the beast in man,

to the withered heart of the egoist disdain of all consideration for his fellow men,

the trampling underfoot of all barriers which enclose the brute greed of Lucca, and the lust of pleasure to the condenser of the world.

It means the shameless ascendancy of base impulses and motives which were, if not virtuously suppressed, or at least hypocritically hidden.

To the believer, it means the repudiation of dogma, the negation of super sensuous world,

the descent into the flat for nominalism, to the sensitive Nietzsche yearning for aesthetic thrills.

It means the vanishing of ideals in art, and no more power in the accepted forms to to arouse emotion and to all.

It means the end of an established order, which for thousands of years has satisfied logic,

fettered depravity, and in every art matured something of beauty.

So to no doubt this is a coming apart,

a crumbling of fundamental social structures and also of artistic forms that have fostered excellence for hundreds of years.

So in and tattooing in the generation he condemned.

It's a very long book and he condemns basically every single contemporary art movement.

So, um, and he sees them all not just as artistically misguided, but as a sign of racial degeneration.

So he condemns anything that he sees as, quote, a morbid deviation from an original type.

So any form of individualism, any form of difference, and he classes the genius and the criminal as equally a morbid deviation from the original type.

So it's the idea that every bit uniformity, orthodoxy, convention, tradition are all enormously important to him and to him.

What fetters the beast in man? Um, what is the way of, um, festering depravity, satisfying logic, etc.?

That's what he sees. That stability, that coherence, that normative ness of society is what he sees as the health of civilisation and the future.

So he sees these deviations from the norm that his fear is, which he talks about.

Um, sort of see, the scientific basis is the idea that they will be passed from generation to generation until the human being becomes infertile,

become sterile, that it's become so, um, specialised, so deviant, that no longer exists, um, able to generate itself now.

What you can see how Wald's doctrine of individualism of realising the self is absolutely opposite to this philosophy and this view in life.

So Wilde rejects it. To him, it's crucially important to reject the standards of one's age not arbitrarily,

but rather not to accept them obediently, but to think individually about what you think is morally correct.

To develop art as your own form of self-expression, not a form of conformity and obedience to norms.

So in that sense, no doubt, sure enough, devotes an entire chapter to Wilde in the generation as an example of what he calls the degenerate type.

So this is expressed in not as few in Wilde art, but also in his dandy esque dress.

So note doubt spent a good ten pages on the moral wrongness of dressing for yourself rather than according to fashion of the day,

because that, again, is an offence to other people, an indubitable proof of moral perversion.

Now, it's worth remembering that this book was written in 1892, so it's three years before Wilde's trials,

and that's to give you a sense of the ways in which Wilde's philosophy of art,

his manner of writing, and so on are country, that it's not just his sexuality that's seen as an offence to society,

to conservative thinkers, everything about Wilde is an offence to society.

So the other thing to remember with, to note with no doubt, is he does.

The whole of the book is about categorising writers, categorising artists, categorising types.

They're all types of a kind of degeneration, and he diagnoses them this as a kind of pathological condition.

So it's a perfect example of what Michel Foucault in The History of Sexuality,

volume one, sees as a way that social control is shifting at that point.

So he argues that by the time you're getting to the late 19th century, the control of the confession has loosened.

So religion doesn't have the same control upon the individual, and that that has therefore shifted, been shifted to retain control of the individual.

It's been shifted in, in, in effect to doctors and parents.

So that private behaviour, the idea of the individual sexual development and so on is something to be carefully policed,

observed and police to control this morbid deviation and the pathologizing of individual expression.

The idea that you divide people into types and diagnose them and then look to correct them.

That's the not ours. And it's together with long process are a long process.

Who writes on the criminal type. And it's a lot of sort of post Darwin kind of abuse of scientific method.

So there's a huge amount if you look at long barroso's criminal Man,

it's full of photographs of what's regarded as the ways that forehead types or ear shapes or whatever else are a sign of incipient criminality.

So the idea that you can supposedly scientifically diagnose that this is the point of a lot of skull measuring and so on.

Um, so what I'm aiming to do is place wild in this landscape to look at,

wild at the way in which in the 1890s, you can trace in both backwards and forwards as both Victorian,

as a modernist, as a product of his society writing to him, provoking a contemporary audience, but also heralding new movements in literature.

So he's this, as I said, you can see him as a kind of midwife to modernism.

So all of Wilde's works are were written located in recognisable 19th century genres.

So, for example, his plays, um, his very early play.

So he writes a Russian, uh, Russian revolutionary play, The Russian Revolution.

This is where the Nicholas at that point, to the kind of, um, opposition to the Tsarist government in the era of analysts lists.

It's actually there was a whole trend at the time for writing Russian revolutionary drama and everybody else's plays.

The revolutionaries, all the villains and the baddies and everything else. That's much more ambiguous in waltz version of this.

In the case of the Duchess of Padua, another of his sort of juvenile.

Well, they're not quite juvenile. He's grown up by then, but they're not successful.

So actually, Padua is an exercise in the five act historical drama.

I love Victor Hugo. Um, and with lashings of a sort of pseudo Shakespeare,

it's worth reading just to reassure you that if you are a writer yourself and your early works have not yet broken through,

greatness can be ahead of you, despite what you write early on.

Um, then, in the case of Wilde, society plays Woman of No importance and ideal husband, Lady Windermere's Fan.

They're rooted in contemporary genres, though partly the fallen woman play of which there were endless at the time about women

losing their sexual virtue and plummeting downwards and needing to be expelled from society.

Um, that rooted as well in French boulevard drama, the plays of Alexandra Duma the younger um,

especially la drama camellias, one of his early ones plays by Seydoux.

Um, and there are a lot of French plays.

So for anybody doing English and French, have a look at some of those French plays that Wilde nicks he literally nicks plots from and then rewrites,

which are ways of setting up audience expectations that he then defeats.

If you look at his An Impulse Being earnest, it's rooted in contemporary farces.

There are endless farces about lost babies, about people with double names, with those lots of lots of them set at the seaside.

It was explicitly tied to, um, Gilbert of Gilbert and Sullivan, but he wrote that without Sullivan, his play engaged, it draws off.

So he's drawing off contemporary farces, especially Loks by Pinero.

In the case of The Picture of Dorian Grey,

the so much late 19th century Gothic literature about doubles from Charles Matrons Melmotte the Wanderer and Wild Takes his name in exile,

Sebastian Melmotte from that novel um, through to Doctor Jekyll and Mr. Hyde.

Um, obviously there's a kind of doubling happening in Frankenstein, but actually, much more relevantly, maybe Holmes and Moriarty.

There's a lot of that idea of the the double and identity within that, obviously.

Also in Picture of Dorian Grey. You've got decadent literature.

So who, um, the artist who is.

Ecuador is a decadent novel that's in many ways challenging progressive plot.

It's about savouring the moment and immersion in the senses and different ways, together with obviously lots and lots of morality stories.

It goes back to, um, things like the Proust legend and so on.

In the case of his short stories, it's they play into the late 19th century growth of children's literature.

People like Lewis Carroll and so on. They're also feeding into the taste for fairy stories, but also drawing of Irish folklore and legend.

There are kind of rewriting of this is a point where fairy tales are really growing.

So. Brothers Grimm, Hans Andersen and so on. He's linking into that and then doing an unexpected things with them and his essays.

So that volume of essays entitled intentions.

That title deliberately echoes Walter Peters collection appreciations.

Um, with the wonderfully teasing title of intentions, where the.

It's utterly impossible to tell what Wilde's intentions are in those essays at the same time,

as they're clearly engaging with the pair and part of the periodical press at the time.

So everything he writes is kind of absolutely rooted in,

in conversation with and then rewriting contemporary genre contemporary expectations and traditions.

Now that engagement with contemporary systems of thought and the rewriting of them,

it goes right down to the tiniest sort of molecule of Wilde's writing.

So when he says, I summed up all systems in a phrase all existent, all systems and epigram,

all existence in a phrase, he's doing that right the way down to the form of the paradox of the epigram.

So work is the curse of the drinking classes. It takes drink is the curse of the working classes and flips it on its head.

And in doing that, it's not just a joke of turning things on its head.

I think it locates how far the descriptor working class isn't just about where someone's classes,

it's the reduction of them to their function is work.

And then sees it the other way around and asks how they see their own lives.

Divorces are made in Heaven, obviously takes that sort of religious piety of the idea that marriage is God given,

and someone and looks at it from the perspective of those who might be in an unhappy marriage.

And I love Disobedience is man's original virtue takes that very idea that morality and obedience of somehow the same thing,

and looks at the question of how moral progress.

The, um, abolition of slavery in the 19th century and so on is entirely dependent on intellectual, moral and social disobedience.

And the idea that that's the route to progress now.

Well, it's flipping of things. His ability to construct these paradoxes, it enraged critics at the times at the time,

and they inevitably and endlessly dismissed this as paste, paste, diamond as tinsel, as false wit, um,

easily manufacturable so that Wilde's contemporary Bernard Shaw commented of An Ideal Husband that Mr.

Oscar Wilde's new play at the Haymarket is a dangerous subject because he has the property of meeting,

making his critics dull.

They laugh angrily at his epigrams, like a child who is coaxed into being amused at the very act of seemed to set up a yell of rage and agony.

They protest that the trick is obvious, and that such epigrams can be turned out by the score,

by anyone like minded enough to condescend to such frivolity.

As far as I can ascertain, I am the only person in London who cannot sit down and write an Oscar Wilde play at will.

The fact that his plays that were apparently lucrative remain unique under these circumstances, says much the self-denial of our scribes.

In other words, it's show calling out the ease with which Wilde's plays are supposedly written.

So. What you have is world not just playing games, but challenging fundamental intellectual, social, moral assumptions.

This company is incredibly clever at working out what genre is rooted in what lies behind convention,

and then using the rewrite of convention to challenge those assumptions.

So there's a fundamental connection between systems of thought, systems of morality,

systems of religion and social structure, and the kind of literature that emerges and flourishes and is asserted.

So in many ways,

it's confirming exactly the fears that no doubt has in his belief that things like symbolism and Impressionism and open air painting and so on,

that no doubt rails against. It's a sign of the end of civilisation, no doubt, and recommends things like, um, songs, popular songs in beer houses,

um, farces and, um, traditional ballads that the um, the art that he sees as in any way acceptable.

So the more traditional the better.

So that's an example of the kind of ways in which Wilde is engaging with thought of the time, the very cutting edge of of thought at the time.

His essay The Soul of Man Under Socialism was published in 1891, in the Fortnightly Review.

In it, Wilde advocated socialism, so he advocates socialism as the move away.

He diagnoses the problem with contemporary society and the gross inequalities as rooted in capitalism,

in the worship of possession rather than being, of having, rather than being, and the fact that,

um, a small number of people are allowed to live their lives as they wish because they have wealth,

whereas the vast majority are reduced to the drudgery of soul and body destroying labour.

Um, now, having diagnosed the ills of capitalism, he does not suggest state socialism.

He quite explicitly rejects state socialism or any form of communism, instead advocating that there should be.

And he's rooted in contemporary thinking, early socialist thinking.

But he also reroutes it, not in an idea of compassion for everybody else.

He. He gives this wonderfully provocative argument for socialism and anarchism through everybody's self-realisation.

So he offers a selfish reason for socialism instead of a selfless reason.

So in that way, where Kropotkin, Prince Pierre Kropotkin declares in his radical text that property is theft.

Wilde argues that property is simply a nuisance.

It gets in the way of your self-realisation. So he advocates that everyone believes that the machine should do all the work.

He doesn't know exactly how that's going to happen. The machines are commonly owned, and that everybody is then free to do whatever they wish to do.

It's thoroughly anarchist. It's also thoroughly idealist.

It's also in his analysis of soul destroying, body destroying labour.

He is absolutely in conversation with the radical thinkers to the time.

So John Ruskin's essay on the nature of the Gothic in the Stones of Venice is one of the earliest works on the domination of the machine made,

and how that kills off the aesthetic sense,

but also destroys the value of the hand of the worker and the satisfaction of creation of personal creation.

And it also links in with, say, William Morris, who was one of the leading socialist thinkers at the time,

and his, um, essay Useful Work versus Useless Toil,

which again looks at this satisfaction, the idea of creativity as part of your self-realisation, part of your soul in that way.

So in the course of the soul of man of socialism, Wilde offers this alternative version of Christianity, where Christ's message is not.

Know thyself, but be thyself. And it's all about self-realisation.

So he makes Christ a kind of primary speaker for this.

And the essay itself is unquestionably utopian, as Wilde himself acknowledges.

Is this utopia a map of the world that does not include utopia is not even worth glancing at,

for it leaves out the one country at which humanity is always landing.

And when humanity lands there, it looks out and sees a better country set sail.

Progress is the realisation of utopia.

And he says on that basis, that's why the essay is impractical, because anything that's practical accepts the world as it is now,

and rejecting the world as it is now is both impractical, but also the only way to progress beyond it, to develop utopia, to actually arrive there.

And in being visionary and practical, it means that a lot of readers at the time dismissed it as simply a display,

as simply a joke, a kind of witty exercise by world. But actually, if you read contemporary socialist thinking, he's absolutely get into it.

He's influenced by Mikhail Bakunin, by Prince Pierre Kropotkin, by William Morris.

So you can read William Morris's utopian novel news from nowhere, which is clearly envisioning a very similar kind of society.

And also, Wilde is quite radically expressing sympathy for Russian nihilists.

He talks about them as Christ like.

So he's quite closely aligned himself with revolutionary movements, um, and the fear of revolutionary movements, the sense in which,

as we approach the end of the 19th century,

the number of people who are thinking back to the French Revolution at the end of the 18th century as a real sense of, you know,

society being threatened by these movements, and you get it with, for example,

Lady Bracknell, who talks about if education had any effect of some kind,

you will probably have violent acts taking place in the square,

or when she finds out that Jack was born or at any rate, bread in the handbag, she says.

It reminds one of the worst excesses of the French Revolution, and one knows what that movement led to.

So what mocks that kind of fear of revolution and expresses a sort of huge moral and ethical support for it.

So sort of madness under socialism is Victorian, not just in its politics, but also in being part of the periodical press.

So as I talked about last week, Wildes absolutely brilliant at exploiting new media, exploiting the new readership.

That's around using photography, using advertising, using the form of the lecture tour and so on.

So he's extremely canny at using that form of the popular press.

At the same time, Wilde is the absolute master of having cake and eating it.

Um, he's also exploiting. He's rejecting the popular press.

He's rejecting the idea of public opinion as a force upon art that's meant to control the limits of art, and what form art should take.

So, for example, in the preface to The Picture of Dorian Grey, he declares, there is no such thing as a moral or an immoral book.

Books are well written or badly written, that is all. The moral life of man forms part of the subject matter of the artist.

But the morality of art consists in the perfect use of an imperfect medium.

No art. It's designed to prove anything. Even things that are true can be proved.

No artist has ethical sympathies and ethical sympathy, and an artist is an unpardonable mannerism of style.

No artist is ever morbid. The artists can express everything thought and language after the artist.

Instruments of an art, vice and virtue are to the artists material for an art.

All art is quite useless.

Now it's very easy to play the game of saying all art isn't quite useless, because every work of art has a use of some kind.

Um, that thing about is about as useful as a chocolate teapot. A chocolate teapot is really useful if you're hungry and want some chocolate.

So in the same way, any work of art can be used for any purpose you choose.

What Wilde is doing there?

Those statements make sense not as absolute edicts in themselves, but rather as a push back on any other way of valuing art.

So if you're valuing art for its ethical power, for its adjective power, for its power to teach morality,

Wilde rejects that if you're valuing art for its commercial value again, if you're valuing it as a social cohesion or something like that,

there's a sense in which what he's saying here is pushing back on all those other contemporary,

very popular ways of valuing art and instead saying it is beauty alone, its aesthetic qualities that art should be valued for.

So those statements make sense in conversation with contemporary ways of thinking,

not as absolute sort of pronouncements for above, in and of themselves.

And while does this. So in that sense, you spent a lot of time playing with provoking contemporary ways of valuing art,

and he mocks a lot of the most popular vehicles of the day. So, um, Miss Prism, in, um, The Importance of Being Earnest has written,

is described as having written a three volume novel of more than usually revolting sentimentality.

Um, while it was famous for having said of the death of Little Nell in a curiosity shop for which people were rushing to,

um, you know, obtain across the Atlantic,

they were there waiting for the boats to come in with the latest issue of Old Curiosity to shop to find out if Little Nell would live or die,

wild said. One would have to have a heart of stone not to laugh at the death of Little Nell.

So it's always poking at Victorian sentimentality and the idea of questions about those kind of vicarious sympathy that we can feel in literature,

often neglecting the actual people around. He similarly mocks the idea through Miss Prism, especially the idea of the educated value of literature.

So, um, she declares of the three volume novel that the good ended happily, the bad unhappily.

That is what fiction means with the wonderful double sidedness of fiction meaning not like life as well as in literature.

Um. Oh, the bit where she finds out that Ernest is dead and she says dead.

What a lesson for him. I trust he will profit by it.

So the kind of absurdity of that kind of, um, ethical thinking it's sent up in, in the form of Mr. Prism.

Now, the last section of The Soul of Man Under Socialism is devoted to attacking public opinion as a force over art.

The idea that it is the public that should decide what the artist writes.

Um, and he takes on, well, takes on a lot of the contemporary terms of criticism,

things like morbid and unhealthy and exotic, all of which were ways of expressing moral disapproval for the work of art.

And instead, what Wilde offers instead of this is what could be read very easily as a manifesto for modernism.

So, he declares, the one thing that the public dislike is novelty.

Any attempt to extend the subject matter of art is extremely distasteful to the public,

and yet the vitality and progress of art depend in a large measure on the continual extension of subject matter.

The public dislike novelty because they were afraid of it.

It represents to them a mode of individualism,

an assertion on the part of the artist that he selects its own subject matter and treats it as he chooses.

The public are quite right in that attitude. Art is individualism, and individualism is a disturbing and disintegrating force.

Therein lies its immense value. The fact is, the public make use of the classics of a country as a means of checking the progress of art.

They degrade the classics into authorities. They use them as bludgeons for preventing the free expression of beauty in new forms.

They are always asking a writer why he does not write like somebody else or a painter, why he does not paint like somebody else,

quite oblivious of the fact that if either of them did anything of the kind, they would cease to be an artist.

Um, it's worth when you come to modernism, for those of you in your first year.

When you come to modernism next term, that is a perfect, perfect articulation of things right at the heart of what became a global movement.

So the work of, well, probably most obviously bridges this potential gap between Victorian Mr. Modernist, not helped by the fact that,

again, if you're in the first year, you're doing the own separate papers as though writers belong to one block or the other.

The work that most obviously has a foot in both camps it's world Salome.

So it's inspired by literary movements and works of the 1880s and 1890s,

and in turn inspires and participates in a whole load of art movements and experiments in subsequent decades.

So Salem was originally written in French and enormously influenced by different French writers.

So Baudelaire above all, and his left optimal with the atmosphere of this incredibly ornate, exotic, sinister beauty.

And with it there's challenges to conventional morality and also Baudelaire's ideas of ideas of correspondence, the correspondence equivalent.

So the interconnection between sounds, between the different senses, between sounds, smells, letters, colours, textures,

and the idea that these parallel each other and that you can play on the human senses almost like a kind of keyboard,

bringing them into, um, synthesis in different ways.

And from that came theories of synaesthesia,

which lead through to Faulkner's ideas of total theatre and a huge number of experiments that are done within, um, early modern art movements.

So things like the music of Faulkner and the work of Stravinsky and Kandinsky and so on.

It's also it very influenced the style of Salome is enormously influenced by the writing of Maurice Metallic,

a Belgian playwright who writes these very ornate, um, mystical plays.

So Le Princess Milan, also Pelleas and Melisande and his and um metal links later plays things like Lamp Clues,

The Intruder and the burglar, the blind. They're an enormous influence on Beckett some 40 years later.

So it's writing these new kind of plotless, minimalist plays that are all about atmosphere and language,

which is something that Wilde takes on and turns into something new, arguably, in his society plays, as well as in Salome, Salome.

He's also influenced by Gustav Flaubert, whose short stories in account, um, have this very, um, stylised, exotic, archaic,

complex style and an intensity of detail, together with a kind of a detachment of emotion that you can also see in his novel Colombo.

Um, and above all, he's influenced by Mallarmé.

And Wilde address that shimmer in his letters, Dear master.

Um, and again, whose style is this ornate ness of what became the decadent style and incredible precision of playing with language,

turning language into something on the surface, something that isn't delivering you as a kind of translucent.

You look straight through it to the object beyond, but rather your eye is caught by the surface of language itself.

Um, and questions there about language is transformative.

Language is a kind of puzzle to be solved, or a puzzle that's not solvable, something that you have to experience in itself.

And that's absolutely there in the language of cinema as he writes it.

Um, it's also so salome's also written as part of the Symbolist movement.

And Symbolist theatre was again theatre in the form of things like metal links, place that was not about plot and progress necessarily,

but about situation and emotion and atmosphere together with language, often in a very kind of hard to solve, hard to understand what's happening.

But also symbolism was about the power of the imagination as against mere fact.

So the classic play of that is probably William Adams play.

Axel. Axel, um. And in Axel you have a couple who discover this vast wealth, um, and as they've discovered this vast wealth, they talk together,

they lire size, they imagined the lives they could lead, what they could do, what their lives together will become.

The young lovers. Um.

And having done all of this, they realise that whatever their lives go on to be, they will be less than what they've just imagined.

So they take their own lives. Um, counterintuitive, to say the least.

Um, but it's that whole. And at the heart of Salemi are the same questions about the part that I was talking about last week,

this transformative power of the imagination, but also, I think, really importantly, the transit, the transformative power of language itself.

So as an example of some of what the language is doing,

sorry I haven't put this on the handout I had because it was in a video clip that I can't do anymore.

Um, but what you have here is salami looking at your canon, the John the Baptist figure, and, um, asking him to love her.

And she looks at him and says, you're canon. I am amorous of thy body.

Thy body is white like the lilies of a field that the mower has never mowed.

That body is white like the snows that lie on the mountain.

Like the snows that lie in the mountains of Judea. And come down into the valleys.

The roses in the garden of the Queen of Arabia. Rose not so white as thy body.

Neither the roses in the garden of the Queen of Arabia, the perfumed garden of spices of the Queen of Arabia.

Nor the feet of the dawn when they light on the leaves, nor the breast of the moon.

When she lies on the breast of the sea. There is nothing in the world so white as light about the let me touch thy body.

And your cannon replies back, daughter of Babylon, by woman came evil into the world.

Speak not to me, I will not listen to thee. I listened back to the voice of the Lord God, at which point Solomon says, thy body is hideous.

It is like the body of a leper. It is like a plastic wool, where vipers of crude, like a mustard wool, where the scorpions have made their nest.

It is like the weight and sepulchre full of loathsome things.

And it's horrible. My body is horrible. It is of thy hair that I am enamoured on thy hair.

It's like clusters of grapes, like the clusters of black grapes that hang from the vines of Adam and the land of the Edomites.

Thy hair is like the cedars of Lebanon, like the great cedars of Lebanon that give their shade to the lions,

and to the robbers who would hide themselves by day. The long black nights when the moon hides her face.

When the stars are afraid are not so black. The silence that dwells in the forest is not so black.

There is nothing in the world so black as thy hair. Let me touch thy hair.

And then, sure enough, your canon says back, daughter, I've saw them touch me.

Not. Not the temple of the Lord God.

At which point his hair becomes horrible, covered with mud and dust, like thorns, like a knotted black serpent's writhing round his neck.

And then he goes on. She goes on to his mouth, which is now like a band of scarlet song about, etc., etc. I will leave it so each time.

And then sure enough, the next reversion happens as he says back daughter of Sodom.

And then his red mouth becomes all the horrible things you can possibly think of associated with the redness and scarlet.

So what you have there is language not as description, but as transformation.

The ways in which it's surface. You can hear that you can't read it without hearing those rhythms.

So there's a sense in which it's rhythmical. It's almost kind of hypnotic, but she's transforming what she looks upon,

and that sense of the surface of the language is more important than necessarily what it's talking about.

And that's something absolutely about this power of imagination, the power of the transformative imagination.

So what you have Waltz plans for the first performance in 1893,

a performance was planned with Sara Banhart, who was then aged 49, as the young Salome.

She already had really bad problems with her leg, which led to it being amputated only a few years later.

So the if you think of she was going to play it in the blue wig that she had for a previous Cleopatra.

And so again, it's very much about that transformative projected imagination.

It's going to be anything but a naturalistic production.

And while its plans for that production included the idea that all the characters should be in different shades of yellow,

from pale yellow to deepest orange,

or alternatively, that it should be in the kind of symbolic colour including salami being a poisonous green like a poisonous green lizard.

Um, there were also plans that there would be braziers of perfume before the audience,

so that with each different emotion in the play, a different perfume would be released.

Fabulous idea. But in the absence of air conditioning, those perfumes are going to mingle very, very quickly.

So funnily enough, that was not something that directors took up.

But all of those layers might sound like absurdly extravagant ideas for production, but they're absolutely in tune with theatre movements of the time.

So, um, the theatrical Da that was a performance of the Song of Songs, in which a single colour,

a single sound or note, and a single word or letter were released at the same time.

It's this very idea of correspondence and playing upon the audience, and that was together with a different perfume.

So the notion to waltz absolutely in tune with a lot of the artistic experiments that were completely cutting edge at the time.

Um, now the legacy of Salome. The first production was in 1896, while Wilde was in prison at Linear Pose at the Livre in Paris,

which was the most cutting edge, um small art um theatre in Paris.

In 1905 it was turned into an opera by Richard Strauss.

It inspired Yeats's play The Full Moon in March.

Um, and obviously there are the. One of the first things were the illustrations for the first English edition done by Aubrey Beardsley.

So that influenced by, um, un nouveau, the minimal lines of our Nouveau,

but also a lot of the questions in sort of experimentation that leads through to modernist art and so on,

where you cannot tell the difference in many cases between design and representation.

If you look through those illustrations, what's decoration and what's representation is very, very hard to retain between.

So things like the hand of the Nubian holding, um,

your cannon's head could be it's very hard to distinguish there between what looks like or neatness and what's actually meant to be a body.

There's a lot of that kind of flattening out and play with the surface, um, ways to ask questions about surface and representation and how we see.

So for some of the examples of the ways in which innovative and experimental productions developed with cinema through subsequent decades,

in 1908 there was a Russian production at the Commercial Theatre Theatre in Saint Petersburg,

where the stage set, and sadly I have no pictures of this. The stage set resembled apparently a vast vagina.

In the case of the 1917 production here at the Khomeini Theatre in Moscow.

It had Cubist costumes and designs for, um, the 1918 production with Maud Allen.

Um, and the 1908 production with Maud Allen.

Um as a result of this, when it was read, when it was performed over the next decade, Maud Allen's free dance performance.

So sort of Martha Graham and so on. Influence, free form dance, bare feet.

It's the kind of thing that Isidore Duncan, um, made fashionable and so on.

Um, she performed such an exotic and sexualised and free expressive form of that,

that a conservative MP called Pemberton Billing accused her of being part of a during the

First World War German movement to undermine British morale by bringing in moral decadence.

Um. Mort Allen sued him and his defence was she sued him over an article he had written called The Cult of the clitoris,

with the idea that she was part of this German undermined moral Western moral values and all the rest of it.

And his defence was that if she knew what a clitoris was, ergo she was a lesbian, ergo she was corrupt.

Um, so the way in which this play is located against a kind of moral majority, straight faced, limited version of things, it's wonderful.

And here you have an anatomy of its silent film version.

Um, it goes all the way through to 1977, Lindsay Kemp's, um, first all male production of the play,

and an award winning 1988 Steven Berkoff production, which you can see on video.

It's fascinating. The whole thing played at half speed, almost, um, slightly underwater feel to it, um,

and with everything mined so that when Salome is holding the head of John the Baptist,

her hands are empty, but you can see the head and the whole thing plays on the audience, projects onto the performers, what they're seeing.

So there's this whole history of modernist, cutting edge experimentation that grows out of wilds,

buried in emerges from 19th century debates and and movements.

So the the way in which Wilde's finally dealing with some of his writings and the way that they

connect in with 19th century debates on the philosophy and criticism of art and theories of art,

have a look at his essays collected together in Intentions.

The Critic as Artists. The Decay of Lying, pen, pencil and poison in The Truth of Masks.

So together they were titled intentions where it's impossible to know what the intentions are that provocative,

humorous, paradoxical, and in many cases dialogic.

So either, as in being a staged as a dialogue between two people, when neither is obviously the holder of common sense or truth.

So you're you're not passively listening to someone teaching you through that form.

It's not a Socratic dialogue, it's one that's absolutely about identify the truth lies somewhere between the two speakers, if it lies anywhere at all.

So having a look at the critic as artist, which was first titled The True Function and Value of Criticism A dialogue,

and that very title echoes Matthew Arnold's The Function of Criticism at the Present Time.

Now the argument set forward by Ernest by Gilbert's argument within this dialogue is summed up by the bewildered Ernest,

you have told me many strange things tonight, Gilbert.

You have told me that it's more difficult to talk about a thing than to do it, and that to do nothing at all is the most difficult thing in the world.

You have told me that all art is immoral and all thoughts dangerous, that criticism is more creative than creation,

and that the highest criticism is that which reveals in the work of art what the artist had not put there.

That is exactly because a man cannot do a thing, that he is the proper judge of it, and that the true critic is unfair, insincere and not rational.

Now in this so what you have in the critic is artist within it.

Gilbert's argument is about is a pushback specifically on Matthew Arnold and the kind of the kind of, um,

ideology of the role of the critic that Arnold is setting forth in on translating Homer and in the true Function of criticism,

which is about the idea of disinterestedness, objectivity, fairness.

So a lot of what Arnold's are arguing for is rising above party interests and

personal interests and all the rest of it to be objective and fair in criticism.

And what while does is argue against that into the idea that the criticism in itself can be creative, that it's an act of interpretation,

that it's a subjective interpretation that can create another work of art in the process of criticising.

So he gets rid of a hierarchy where the work of art is first and the act of criticism second,

and instead celebrates criticism as in itself impressive and creative.

And in the process of that he directly quotes and re quotes Arnold.

So Arnold famously in the in on translating Homer, and then repeats himself in On the Function of criticism,

declares that the primary purpose of criticism is, quote, to see the object as in itself it really is.

In other words, to see accurately, to see precisely, to erase yourself in that act of seeing.

An Arnold, in the process of his essay, talks very confidently, often capitalised terms like truth and beauty and excellence,

and the finest, as though these are all communally recognisable.

If you're just objective, you can recognise truth with a capital T or the finest with a capital F, and instead now this term was then taken up.

So while it's not the only one doing this in dialogue, he's part of a process of.

A lot about art. So this phrase to see the object in itself, it really is, was then taken up by Walter Pater,

who, in the conclusion to his studies in the history of the Renaissance,

most notably known mostly as the Renaissance, declared that absolutely one's job is to see the object itself.

It really is. But in order to do this, having Pater having emphasised the isolation of the individual,

the fact that the only way to access the world is through what he calls the thick wall

of personality he talks about necessarily because of this thick wall of personality.

Life outside is reduced to the impressions, a series of impressions that can penetrate that wall of self.

And so he declares that experience already reduced to a group of impressions.

It's ringed round for each one of us by that thick wall of personality through which no real voice has ever pierced on its way to us or from us,

to that which we can only conjecture to be without. Every one of those impressions is the impression of the individual in his isolation,

each mind keeping as a solitary prison his own dream of a world that's 1870s that was seen as very,

very dangerous and was taken off the first edition because of the danger that was presented in his sort of atheistic version of experience and so on,

and then put back on to a later edition. And what you what Payton's doing.

And if you recognise him, say things like Conrad's Heart of Darkness and we live as we dream alone.

It's about that subjectivity, about that necessary isolation.

But Peter is both celebrating it in the individuality of experience, but also warning against it in some ways.

So he talks about how the job of the critic is, quote, up to no one's own impression as it really is to discriminate it, to realise it distinctly.

So you cannot see according to pay to the object as it really is you, but you.

You can only feel these impressions through your thick wall of personality.

So your job is to be as precise about knowing one's impressions as they really are.

So while continues this dialogue in The Critic, as artist Gilbert declares,

it has been said by one whose gracious memory we all Revere, and the music of whose pipe once leered,

preserved enough a Sicilian fields, and made those white feet stir, and not in vain the coming of cowslips,

i.e., Matthew Arnold, that the proper aim of criticism is to see the object as in itself it really is.

But this is a very serious error, and takes no cognisance of criticisms.

Most perfect form, which is in its essence purely subjective and seeks to reveal its own secrets and not the secret of the other.

For the highest, criticism deals with art not as expressive, but as impressive, purely so earnest answers.

The highest criticism, then, is more creative than creation, and the primary aim of the critic is to see the object as in itself.

It really is not. That is your theory, I believe.

And Gilbert says that indeed, that is my theory.

To the critic, the work of art is simply a suggestion for a new work of art of its own that

need not necessarily bear any obvious resemblance to the thing it criticises.

The one characteristic of a beautiful form is that one can put into it whatever one wishes, and see in it, whatever one chooses to see.

And the beauty that gets to creation, its universal and aesthetic element makes the critic creator in his turn and whispers a

thousand different things that were not present in the mind of him who carve the statue,

or painted the panel or grave, the gem. So this to see the object as in itself it really is not.

That's the wilder in method, a kind of quoting and re quoting a distort.

You can see it as distorted, and you can see it as a kind of conversation with the original, destabilising the original, asking questions about it.

So and it's there in the critic is doctors together with the soul of man and socialism together with the decay of lying and so on.

You see wild foreshadowing, central tenets of modernism, the idea of individualism and individual vision.

Think of Orwell's essay on a hanging and the idea that each mind is a separate world.

Think of the multiple viewpoints and perspectives in Joyce's Ulysses, in Woolf's To the Lighthouse, in Conrad's Nostromo.

Um, also, what you have here is a challenge to the doctrine of intentionality.

Um, it prefigures in many ways Barthes death of the author and all sorts of questions

about the role of criticism in relation to any notion of authorial intentionality.

Um, in the essay. Similarly, in dialogue, you can call it an essay, you can call it a dialogue, you can call it whatever you like.

Again, with Wilde, it's very hard to pin down genres. The decay of lying, another of the works within intentions in that it's an attack on realism.

It's an idea that accuracy, fairness, truthfulness, um, are all killing off literature and a celebration of imagination,

individualism, vision, creation, um, all of that under the name of lying.

So it's playing a kind of moral provocation, but asking all sorts of questions about the value of realism within literature.

It's been interpreted by some critics as a kind of nostalgic push back against Zola's naturalism back into the 19th century in romanticism.

But can I think far more accurately be read as a freeing up into the kind of modernist form so you can set it to alongside

things like Virginia Woolf's Mr. Bennet and Mrs. Brown is questioning about the ways in which literature can parallel,

um, realist texts, parallel factual, factual texts, but also what reality is being reflected is the reality of material facts,

or is it the reality of imagination, sensation, individual thought and response?

So in that sense, again, it links into things like D.H. Lawrence in celebration of the novel as a form of self-expression,

a form of living life in itself. So phrases of worlds that are in these essays, things like a one in history, a one duty to history is to rewrite it.

That's exactly what works like for quartettes like Ulysses, um, like To the Lighthouse and the wasteland and so on.

Do their works that rewrite literary history, rewrite the idea of history and, um, sequence.

You get it in in Woolf's between the acts. It's absolutely essential to.

It's tradition and the individual talent.

There's a conversation here where wild almost loosens the paving stones so that the modernists can see the beach underneath.

There's a brilliant kind of way in which he he upends.

He dissolves a lot of Victorian conventions and tradition in ways that free up writers form afterwards.

They tend not to talk back to Wilde because Wilde is still in disgrace at the point they're writing.

But it's very hard to have seen what happens afterwards, having happened without a lot of his experimentation.

So together, what you have in these essays, uh, a rejection of authority, orthodoxy, the establishment tradition,

and instead a celebration of the individual, of subjectivity, personal vision, imagination, creation, rebellion.

These works are rooted in 19th century debates.

They break them over open and free literature from what could be seen as 19th century shackles offering a way forward to freedom,

iconoclasm, and the individualism that is at the heart of early modernism.

Like a. That's it folks.

