[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
So while homosexuality is in many ways the most famous thing about him, it's what he was known for in what dominated criticism of his works,

or indeed of his life for decades and decades after the trial in 1895.

However, the very notion of Wilde as a homosexual, various critics, especially Alan Sinfield, um,

have argued, is in itself anachronistic that the idea of the notion of a homosexual as a kind of pathology,

as a complete identity, with attributes and habits and inclinations and all of that,

was in many ways a manufactured, invented at the end of the 19th century, and much of it after the world trials.

So that the irony is that Wilde, having resisted the idea of this sort of typology, typology, this consigning of individuals to categories,

the pathologizing of behaviours and ways of thinking and desires, and so on, that he then becomes in some ways the most visible version of this.

So in the 1930s, dockers slang for a gay man was an Oscar.

Um, but at the same time, a number of critics have argued that what you had in the late 19th century was homosexual acts,

same sex acts, but not the notion of an entire identity or pathology that went with it.

And some of that is the development of late 19th century, early 20th century sexology.

Um, much of it deeply homophobic, some of it not.

Um, so it also means that if what we're looking for in Wilde's works are homosexual references,

uh, types of visibility, types of communication and so on.

It's problematise by the distorting effect of hindsight.

So that post the world trials, as critics such as Alan Sinfield and Ed Cohen, um, and to an extent Richard L'Amour and so on,

have argued things that were attributes of Wilde, then became typed as attributes of homosexuality.

So in that sense, things like high style, frivolity, campiness, aestheticism, and so some of those before that,

uh, in many ways associated with, um, perhaps a sort of sensuality, a kind of, um, unbridled self-expression.

But that was often actually in, um, associated with, in some ways, unbridled hetero sexual desire as much as homosexual desire.

So if you look back to, um, Gilbert and Sullivan's operetta Patience, the aesthetes all attract the kind of,

um, flamboyant and effeminate and, um, art loving aesthetes all attract the women's attention.

So much so that the guardsmen all turned aesthetes to try and get their girls.

Um, so in that sense, and that's the that's what Wilde was touring America with in the 1880s.

So just illustrating this effect of hindsight, this is a cartoon from 1881, and in it, it's by George DeMaria and in it mortal.

Looking visibly like Oscar Wilde. Um, talks to Mrs. Brown and mortal says how consummately lovely your son is, Mrs. Brown.

And Mrs. Brown, a Philistine from the country, replies, what? He is a nice manly boy, if that is what you mean, Mr. Model.

He has just left school, you know, and wishes to be an artist and model.

Asks why should he be an artist? And Mrs. Brown said well, he must be something.

And model said, why should he be anything? Why don't let him remain beauty, remain forever, content to exist beautifully.

And stage direction, says Mrs. Brown, determines that at all events, her son shall not study art under mortal.

That seems to be very, very clearly a cartoon that's about Wilde's effect on young men.

The idea of corrupting young men, which was at the centre of the accusations the 1895 trials,

now 1881, is before, by any account, Wilde has his first homosexual engagement.

So this is not what you're. Unless George Murray is somehow psychic.

That is not what it's about. So that's the part of the distorting effect of science.

And another is this idea of, um, the type of the homosexual is alive and kicking a good century later.

So in Richard Edmonds, Oscar Wilde, there is this photo, and I don't know about you,

but any time I read a large biography looking at the pictures, it's one of the very first things I do.

So reading through it in the 1980s, here was Oscar Wilde in a dress, um, and a jewelled bra as Salome.

So I read through elements biography, waiting for the moment where he gets into said skirt into a bra and goes to the photographers.

And there is no mention in the entire biography of when this took place.

Indeed, what happened was, as Hellman was writing the biography, just as Hellman was dying in the final, sort of just before it was submitted.

This was found in an archive, this photo. It is, in fact, a 1907 photo of Alexandrovich Um, a soprano who sang in Strauss's Salome.

Um, what is fascinating is that was discovered not long after Elmo's biography was published,

but you will find this photo republished, identified as Wilde for good two decades after that.

So the notion that because world was involved in same sex relationships, he must have put on a skirt and a bra and Salome somehow was him.

So it's an interesting sort of version of beware of those kind of narratives or expectations around Wilde.

So this just drives me crazy. The echo isn't getting you.

I'm just hearing coming back at me. Um, so given that warning,

it's therefore important not to take for granted some notion that there's an inevitable conviction of Wilde that he's stepping his.

The gayness is somehow incredibly visible in that way.

So a final kind of corrective for that is Ernest Bolton and Frederick Park, otherwise known as Fanny and Stella.

And they were young men who habitually dressed as women.

There's a sort of debate now on whether they should be identified as trans women or transvestites or whatever else,

but they were they were kind of famous in some areas in London,

they used to go into theatres dressed as women and pick up men,

and they were arrested in 1870 and prosecuted, having been, um, intimately examined by the police.

Now they were then tried for gross and for, um, homosexuality, for conspiring, as it was, the prosecution said, for conspiring to commit sodomy.

Now, the rhetoric of the Defence Council, it's really important in giving an insight into some of the thinking of the time.

So their defence counsel turned to the jury in its final summation and said, and address them as follows.

My friend, the attorney general, in the course of his eloquent peroration, asked you to perform your high office,

and no doubt he produced an effect upon you at the time when he said he invited you to stop this plague.

Gentlemen, I call upon you to perform a higher, a kinder and a more patriotic office.

I call upon you to do something which will be of greater utility,

and that is to pronounce by your verdict that they libel the morality and character of this country who say that that plague exists.

I trust your verdict will establish that the moral atmosphere of England is not yet tainted with the impurities of continental cities,

and that free as we all are from our island position, we are insulated from the crimes to which you have had illusion made,

and you will pronounce by your verdict on this case that at all events, with regard to these facts,

that London is not cursed with the sins of Sodom or Westminster, tainted with the vices of Gomorrah.

Um. It's fabulous. It's basically saying we're English gentlemen, and that kind of thing doesn't happen here.

And please, jury, declare these men innocent to prove that that kind of thing is unthinkable and does not happen here.

And it worked. They got off. So it's that the grey area.

So obviously it's ridiculous. Um, not to refer to the sins of Sodom than.

Isis of Gomorrah. Same sex desire has obviously existed around the world, including Westminster and this island.

Um, but the desire not to see it, the desire not to know it,

that provided in some ways a large what we could call a grey area or a safe space in which world was able to write about it and talk about it,

not overtly, but in all sorts of complex, coded ways.

It freed up a space, um, to recognise same sex desire to discuss it, um, to talk to those who know while denying to those who did not know.

So it's that, um, in that sense, it's that it's both.

And the the very un speak ability of same sex desire makes it speakable in other ways,

and subtle and clever and multiple ways that that idea of layers of possibility within the text.

Now, at the same time, trying to type Wilde as a crusading propagandist for same sex desire is deeply problematic.

It's worth remembering that he ended up in court because he prosecuted Queensberry for libel for writing a note,

um, describing Wilde as posing some termite um.

So Wilde defended himself publicly from that, and at his very, very lowest ebb in prison, his health broken, desperate and feeling suicidal.

He addressed the following letter, um, to the Home Secretary.

The petition of the above named prisoner,

humbly show us that he does not attempt to pollute in any way the terrible offences of which he was rightly found guilty.

But to point out that such offences are forms of sexual madness, and are recognised as such not merely by modern pathological science,

but by much modern legislation, notably in France, Austria and Italy,

where the laws affecting these misdemeanours have been repealed on the ground that they are diseases to be cured by a physician,

rather than crimes to be punished by a judge, and the works of eminent men of science such as Long Brazeau,

and no doubt to take merely two instances out of many.

This is especially insisted on, with reference to the intimate connection between madness and the literary and artistic temperament.

Professor no Doubt, in his book on degeneracy, since published in 1894,

having devoted an entire chapter to the petitioner as a special type of this fatal law.

Um, what you have there is world at his absolute lowest ebb, buying into this kind of poisonous,

homophobic typology which identifies somebody with same sex desires as somehow either mad or ill, um,

and somehow it being beyond their, um,

their control and should be treated as a disease that that Wilde's his petition was refused and he

went on in De profundis to condemn the laws under which he was tried as wrong and unjust laws.

But this does problematise any simple attempt to make him some kind of gay rights crusader.

Um, it didn't work like that, and that really would have been straightforward suicide.

At the same time as it's worth looking at to a figure like Edward Carpenter who overlapped with Wilde and, um,

have a look at his writings on homosexuality for some amazing, um, and actually very quietly,

um, sort of effective crusading and that if you're interested in this area.

So Wilde's most famous declaration on homosexual identity and love between men is incredibly, characteristically ambiguous.

So it's both a celebration and could almost be seen as a kind of denial.

So in court, he was tried on within a publication in which some of his own settings and philosophies, the use of the young were,

alongside a poem by Lord Alfred Douglas, and Douglas's poem was called Two Loves and One love was True love.

The love of a young man for a maiden, and the other was the love that dare not speak its name.

And Wilde was challenged in court. And what was this love that dare not speak its name?

And this is how Wilde replied, the love that dare not speak its name in this century.

It's such a great affection of an elder for a younger man,

as there was between David and Jonathan, such as Plato made the very basis of his philosophy,

and such as you find in the sonnets of Michelangelo and Shakespeare, it is that deep spiritual affection that is pure as it is perfect.

It dictates and pervades great works of art, like those of Shakespeare and Michelangelo, and those two letters of mind such as they are.

It is in this century misunderstood, so much misunderstood,

that it may be described as the love that dare not speak its name, and on account of it I am placed where I am now.

There is nothing natural about it. It is intellectual, and it repeatedly exists between an elder and a younger man.

When the elder has the intellect and the younger has all the joy, hope and glamour of life before him, that it should be so.

The world does not understand. The world mocks at it, and sometimes puts one in the pillory for it.

In that while is both taking same sex love and putting it in a continuity and a history as inspiring some of the greatest,

the most famous, the most possibly canonical art and literature that exists.

So he's making it, and he's locating it as an inspirational force and an inspirational force that goes

back over a millennium and back to the Bible with David and Jonathan at the same time.

He seems to be and it's always seems to be. It's how you read it with world, how you hear it to be leaving at least the sexuality unspoken.

Or possibly denying it. Um, but he does use it very importantly to validate relationships, right?

The way back to Plato through classical literature and the Renaissance and so on.

Now, this question of how one engages with sexuality within Wilde's works, homosexuality in particular.

Um, I'd say one of the important things is not to see it necessarily as a completely separate issue.

But rather to bind it in to everything while it does and deeply into its methodology.

So the he's writing to write about homosexuality.

He's it became a criminal offence 1886 the Labour share amendment.

So there was always look there were laws against sodomy, as it was known from before the Renaissance onwards, and those laws had not been repealed.

In 1886, the Labour share amendment criminalised acts of, quote, gross indecency between men,

whether in public or private, and that wonderful vagueness about gross indecency is,

as the law is often framed, deliberately, ambiguously, and therefore all encompassing, just like clause 28 under the Tories.

It's it's as if laws are all encompassing and ambiguous.

It's not an accident, frankly. Um, so that amendment, which is what he was prosecuted under.

Rendered relationships, um, extremely dangerous and any visibility of them in any sense and a sense of which and that amendment,

that 1886 amendment was known commonly as the Blackmailers Charter.

And sure enough, Wilde came up against it. So Alfred Douglas, um, in the 1890s, confessed to wild, admitted to what just casually said 12,

that he's lost one of Wilde's letters, that it had fallen into the hands of blackmailers,

and it was a letter in which Walt addressed, um Douglas's Fleur de lis talks of his rose leaf lips being made for the madness of kisses.

Walt's response was to get in touch with a friend of his, the French poet Pierre Louis,

and ask Pierre Louis to write a translation of the letter in the form of a sonnet, which was then published in The Spirit Lamp as a work of art,

so that when the blackmailer came to him and asked for £60 for the letter, Wilde said,

I have never before been offered that amount of money for a work of that shortness, so if you can get £60 for it, do so with my blessing.

Um, and refuse to pay for it, he said. It's a work of art.

Get it published for £60 if you can.

Um, and he gave the blackmailer half a sovereign, and the would be blackmailer later returned the letter to him, saying it's no use trying to rent.

Um, so what Wilde successfully did was retype the letter by having it translated and published.

So that whole thing I've been talking about the instability of Wilde's works,

the idea that it is the spectator and not art that really that that mirrors, that is something that,

that, that he's playing with for very important reasons as well as habitually in the kind of conversations he's having about artistic representation,

realism and so forth. Now. The work that of worlds that probably most centrally is concerned with same sex desire is the portrait of Mr. W H.

Was first published in Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine in July 1889.

But like so many of Wilde's works, it's an incredibly complex one.

He carries on working on it over the next six years.

Um, there are different and unstable versions of it. There's a much longer version of it.

Um, I would urge you, if you're interested in it, have a look at In Small's edition in the Wild shorter fiction,

um, edition in the Oxford English Texts um, which is also available online through Sony.

So what you have at the centre of the portrait of Mr. W.H. is a reading of Shakespeare's sonnets as centrally concerned with same sex desire.

So the bit that, you know, if you're studying Shakespeare's sonnets, that is,

you completely take for granted, which is that some of them are addressed to the dark lady,

and some of them are addressed to the young man, and that they are as amorous and as beautiful, and as engaged and sensual in many different ways.

The ones address the young man as they are to the dark lady, one that was not established.

Scholarship in the 1880s. Wilde is one of the absolute first to be reading in public the sonnets in that way.

But how far? That is what he's doing in this essay.

It's very this essay or the short story again, genre incredibly unstable, incredibly difficult to declare upon.

So this is a story. Well, it's the analysis bound up in a tale of a group of three young men who are friends.

One of them, Cyril Graham, is a very effeminate and beautiful young man who, at college and at school,

always played the girl's parts in Shakespeare and did so utterly brilliantly.

Now he develops a theory about Shakespeare's sonnets that a certain number of them are addressed to an actor a young,

beautiful young boy actor called Willie Hughes,

who he determines must have played Rosalind and Ophelia and all the other girl parts in Shakespeare's plays.

And he picks out in the sun. It's a lot of in contained in this work.

It's a lot of close reading of the sonnets, the references to Will all the way through the puns on Will,

which if you study Shakespeare's sonnets, absolutely. They're there, they're Shakespeare coming on all sorts of things in that and puns on Hughes,

the surname Hughes and colour and the way that Hughes plays through it.

And again, all the references to love male beauty, um, and the sort of gender fluidity within it.

So those are contained. So this is, there's a whole section in there of Cyril Graham offering his theory of the sonnets.

Now, his two friends are not convinced by this, saying, you have absolutely no evidence that a boy player called William Hughes ever existed.

This is complete fantasy. But then Cyril Graham produces a portrait of Mr. W.H. of this incredibly beautiful young man.

Um, a Renaissance portrait of of Will Hughes, at which point, um, they begin to be potentially convinced until one of them,

visiting the studio of a painter, discovers the sketches that that painter had done to produce the portrait of Will Hughes.

So it was a forgery, at which point Sarah Graham, um, takes his own life to prove the theory.

He dies by suicide, at which point Erskine, one of the friends, becomes completely convinced of the truth of this theory.

You then have Erskine's further close reading of the sonnets in support of this theory, um,

at which point the narrator remains sceptical and Erskine writes him a letter saying I, too, will take my life to prove that this theory is true.

Um. The narrator hurries to Switzerland to prevent us from doing this and finds us going already dead, but having just died of consumption,

not having taken this life at all, at which point the narrator becomes convinced of the truth of the theory.

So there's a wonderful kind of contained around these close readings.

There's a narrative that makes it incredibly hard to work out whether this story, this it's and there's a sense in which it is like as the critic,

as artist, it's the kind of subjective criticism that says it's not about being fair or honest or true to the original work.

That criticism is in itself more creative than creation.

So there's one sense that that is what Wilde is demonstrating in this.

He's also engaging with the question of what constitutes proof of a theory.

What's what kind of external evidence somehow evidences the truth of the text.

It's very again, you know, in advance of, of but death of the author until the question about what makes what validates

a reading in all sorts of ways is one of the questions that surrounds that,

together with the randomness and perversity and, um, unpredictability of how belief works, why you believe in certain things and not others.

So in that sense, it's a it's a deeply complicated, as always, an unstable text.

Because again, Wilde is, as always, rewriting it constantly. But it's also it's unquestionably what it is, is about homoeroticism.

It's about the inspirational force of homo eroticism and same sex desire and the beauty of the male body and the notion of,

um, surpassing gender, that biology is not what determines gender, uh, in performance, in literature, in life, or in desire.

So that's running through the story, whatever. And actually in the later versions of it,

he extends it and does even more in placing same sex desire and homoeroticism at the heart of not just the Renaissance,

but the greatest art kind of throughout human history.

So there's an extraordinary, um, ambition to this work.

It's beautiful and wonderful in all sorts of ways,

and it's well worth putting alongside De Profundis for as an examination of all sorts of his art theories and so on.

So in one sense, he's the first one, the absolute first writers, if not the first writer in English to put forward,

um, the theory of same sex desire at the heart of so many of Shakespeare's sonnets.

But it's also questionable whether he's doing that at all. Is that what this story about?

Invented evidence and so on? Is it doing? Is it denying it or is affirming it in that sense?

It's very, very hard to tell how to take it.

And indeed, when this was brought up in the trials in by Queensberry Defence in the first trial of Wilde, he was asked by Carson,

I believe you have written an article to show that Shakespeare's sonnets were suggestive of unnatural vice,

and Wilde answered, on the contrary, I have written an article to show that they were not.

I objected to such a perversion being put upon Shakespeare.

Um, in one sense that seems like a straightforward denial.

In another sense, if he's denying that he was saying they were suggestive of unnatural vice.

The portrait, Mr. W.H. typed same sex desire as anything but unnatural vice.

It is entirely natural and it's a glorious and inspirational and beautiful force.

So again, even Wilde's denial is wonderfully ambiguous in its phrasing.

So the work now that is obviously most commonly read as concerned with same sex desire is The Picture of Dorian Grey.

And that accusation, if you call it that of being concerned with same sex desire, was part of the fury that followed its first publication.

And as I said last week, it's not just about the subject matter.

It's very, very importantly about the style, but the very terms in which it was condemned shows this issue of the kind of grey area

of the line to be trodden between what you could state and what you couldn't state.

So the following about it appeared in the Scots Observer.

Why go grubbing in muck heaps? The world is fair in the proportion of healthy minded men and honest women.

To those that are fair, fallen or unnatural is great.

Mr. Oscar Wilde has again been writing stuff that were better in written, and while The Picture of Dorian Grey, which he contributes to lip cults,

is ingenious, interesting, full of cleverness, and plainly the work of a man of letters, it is false art, for its interest is medico legal.

It is false to human nature, for its hero is a devil. It is false to morality,

for it is not made sufficiently clear that the writer does not prefer a course of unnatural iniquity to a life of cleanliness, health, and sanity.

The story, which deals with matters only fitted for the Criminal Investigation Department or a hearing in camera, is described as brutal.

Unlike the author and editor, Mr. Wilde has brains and art and style.

But if he can write for none but outlawed noblemen and perverted telegraph boys,

the sooner he takes to tailoring or some other decent trade, the better for his own reputation and the public morals.

Now, if you're puzzled by the term apparent randomness of outlawed noblemen and perverted telegraph boys,

that was a coded reference to what was known as the Cleveland Street scandal of a few years earlier,

where, um, certain aristocrats were found to have been paying um young clerks in the post office telegraph boys for sexual favours.

So it's not been spoken.

It's been gesture that for those who already know, just as medico legal, um, it's a kind of coded term that you'll find in general,

the idea that only medical textbooks and law courts should deal with such matters.

And in case anyone missed the point, the following appeared later in a letter to the editor in The Scots Observer,

again asking does an artist break the march of his story with tedious dissipate dissertations upon jewels and wearisome catalogues of furniture?

And does he not, when dealing with the avowedly with an avowedly delicate topic refrain, as Marlowe refrains in Edward the Second,

from superfluous detail and exotic sentimentality, Mr. Wilde has proved that he lacks the tact and restraint to give up the artistic representation,

to give us the artistic representation of a hero who is half Jack the Ripper, half Gaveston,

and the reception that has been accorded his story must be peculiarly plain painful to him.

So what you have there in the references to Edward the Second and Gaveston again,

that idea that newspapers may be read by a pure minded 15 year old girl or something like that,

it's again coded references to same sex desire, famous figures in history and some press.

The idea that it's not being said overtly, it's been touched upon reference for those already in the know.

With again this but also notably there are complaints here.

It's not the subject matter so much that's the problem.

It's the treatment of the subject matter, the failures I talked about last week to distance the narrator and reader from from Dorian and his crimes,

the fact that it asks you to delight in them, to luxuriate in them, to find aesthetic pleasure in how they described in as far as they are described.

And again, you can see why that thing about the crimes of Dorian are left deliberately obscure.

Indeed, it is the reader who has brought them. The tactical reasons for that become very, very clear in that sense.

So. It's evidence of how it's not so much the subject matter.

It's the treatment. It's what world's doing with same sex desire that's problematic in Dorian.

Um, it's notable that part of what he did was play down some of it after.

So in the Lippincott version, which these letters are about, this letter and review are about in the Lippincott version it was more explicit.

So in the Lippincott version, for example, there's this passage which gets significantly cut.

Let us sit down, Dorian said Horwood, looking pale and pained.

Let us sit down. I will sit in the shadow and you shall sit in the sunlight.

Our lives are like that. Just answer me one question.

Have you noticed in the pictures something that you did not like?

Something I probably at first did not strike you, but that revealed itself to you suddenly.

I see you did. Don't speak. Wait till you hear what I have to say.

It is quite true. I have worshipped you with far more romance.

A feeling than a man usually gives to a friend. Somehow I had never loved a woman.

I suppose I never had time. Perhaps, as Harry said, a really grand passion is the privilege of those who have nothing to do.

And that is the use of the idle classes in a country. Well, from the moment I met you.

Your personality had the most extraordinary influence over me.

I quite admit that I adored you madly, extravagantly, absurdly.

I was jealous of every one to whom you spoke. I wanted to have you all to myself.

I was only happy when I was with you. When I was away from you.

You were still present in my art. It was all wrong and foolish. It is all wrong and foolish still.

Of course. I never let you know anything about this. It would have been impossible.

You would not have understood it. I did not understand it myself.

One day I determined to paint a wonderful portrait of you. It was to have been my masterpiece.

It is my masterpiece. But as I worked it, every flake and film of colour seemed to reveal my secret.

I grew afraid that the world would know of my idolatry. I felt, Dorian, that I had told too much.

It was then that I resolved never to allow the picture to be exhibited.

So in that sense, what you have in an earlier version, lines like I have somehow never felt for, you know, I have never loved a woman and so on.

Those lines were cut in later version at the same time as wild absolutely rejects suggestions that he ought to be more explicit,

more condemnatory, put in a more moral structure to the novel, and so on.

So he's not withdrawing it. He's making it more and more, um, subtle, complex, playful, um,

and in many ways seductive in the ways that the atmosphere of the book becomes more and more, um, ornate, more involved, more complex.

So. And it's worth noting as well that.

At the same time as Hollywood, here and elsewhere in the novel, is the most clearly same sex desire and character in the novel.

He is also the closest to somebody who's morally conventional.

So he's the one who calls upon Dorian to repent.

He's the one who's compassionate and concerned with Dorian's actions and so on.

So if there's a moral voice and a moral core in the book, it is battle.

So there's anything but any kind of association in that sense, between same sex desire and moral corruption or, um, the using and abusing of others.

So within the novel, you get this kind of blurring of boundaries.

The. Questions of narrative voice, the blurring of identification,

the ways in which the instability of the narrative voice is worth looking at in exactly

the same way as I was talking about with the fairy tales in short stories last week.

So reviews. Reviews were particularly outraged by the failure of the narrative to properly condemn Dorian,

and one of the narratives that was held up as why can't Wild write more like this?

Really interesting, one of the narratives that's repeatedly held up in reviews as a better example

of how to do this kind of thing is Stevensons Doctor Jekyll and Mr. Hyde.

Now it's worth noting.

And Doctor Jekyll and Mr. Hyde, just as with Dorian, there's a very tight circle, an exclusive circle of of men who are close friends.

There's a black male within the novel.

And the question of what, um, Jekyll's friends think the hold is that Hyde, the young man who comes and goes from his house and has a key,

and it's noted in the book, he repeatedly enters the house by the dark back passage.

There's a whole thing of what what's being referenced there, what's being talked about.

So in many ways you can say Doctor Jekyll and Hyde.

Is it because it's engaging with exactly the same kind of ideas and issues but in very, very different form?

So. Within Jekyll and Hyde, Doctor Jekyll and Mr. Hyde.

What you have is the unquestionable repulsion, the moral repulsion of Jekyll's friends,

but also this idea of the kind of disgusting ness connected with any idea of this.

What could be, um, a sexual liaison. So this is Utterson description.

Mr. Hyde was pale and dwarfish. He gave an impression of deformity without any name malformation.

He had a displeasing smile. He withdrawn himself to the lawyer with a sort of murderous mixture of timidity and boldness,

and he spoke with a husky whispering in somewhat broken voice.

All these were points against him.

But not all of these together could explain the hitherto unknown disgust, loathing, and fear with which Mr. Utterson regarded him.

There must be something else, said the perplexed gentlemen. There is something more.

If I could find a name for it. God bless me. The man seems hardly human.

Something troglodyte tick, shall we say? Or can it be the old story of Doctor Fell?

Or is it the mere radiance of a foul soul that thus transpires through and transfigures its clay continent?

The last, I think, for. Oh, my poor Harry Jekyll, if ever I read Satan's signature upon a face, it is on that of your new friend.

Compare that to Dorian's beauty, to Dorian's charm, to Dorian's wit,

to the way that he draws all to him and attracts all the ways in which James Vane thinks he's guilty,

and then looks upon the radiance and youth and beauty of his countenance, and thinks again.

So in that sense, it's Dorian Grey. It's a novel's blurring of the line, the challenge between moral and immoral appearance and reality,

life and art that makes the novel so problematic for readers then and readers now.

And I would say beware of readings that find a single hidden meaning, a true meaning, a single reference within Wilde's works.

They don't work like that. Quite simply, they are multiple.

They are unstable. They are challenging. They subvert expectations and assumptions.

Um, they're full of coded sexual references. They're full of all sorts of other texts.

They are multiple and unstable in that sense.

And that is the way he writes, and that is what he believes in as the way that literature works in all sorts of ways.

So in that sense. Same sex desire.

Homoeroticism. Love Between men runs through everything that Walt writes in all sorts of ways,

but not as a hidden message or not as a true meaning, but rather part and parcel of his vision.

Part and parcel of the kind of values and style, and it's integrated and woven into them in all sorts of ways.

It's referencing and in conversation with them.

So if you're going to look at Wilde as a gay writer, I think it's really important to look at Wilde as a writer about sexuality,

a writer not specifically about same sex desire, but about sexual self-definition, about the right of individualism and self definition.

So in that sense, these texts are absolutely joined together with all his other texts in the ways that he's arguing for individualism.

He's arguing for the right of self-creation, self performance, self-expression, and the connection between that and artistic self-expression.

Um, but also the ways in which that, um, the obscenity of being asked to conform to social morality,

to social values, to social behaviour, to the idea of moral orthodoxy.

So in that sense, what you have is individualism means this kind of dissolving of barriers, challenging of types, um, championing of self-expression.

So that's true of everything he writes. It runs through the soul of man.

It runs through his plays, through his essays, through everything he writes.

Now there is, however, obviously a very long line of identifying Wilde's works as about homosexuality.

One of my favourites was as early as 1907, so looking straight,

she saw the revival of A Woman of No Importance and summed it up to a friend in the fall as the following Mr. Tree.

So that was Herbert Beerbohm Tree who was playing Lord Illingworth in the play.

Mr. tree is a wicked Lord, staying in a country house, who has made up his mind to bug out one of the guests, a handsome young man of 20.

The handsome young man is delighted when his mother enter, enters.

She sees his lordship and recognises the same as having populated with her 20 years before,

the result of which was the handsome young man she appeals to Lord tree not to [INAUDIBLE] his own son.

He replies that this is additional reason for doing it. Oh, he is a very wicked Lord.

Um, it's very, very strange. Um, and in some ways I will come back to it that there are all sorts of things in there

that are picking up on things that Wilde's playing with and a woman of no importance,

and that issue of how far the the plays the works are about homosexuality is still there.

If you think of something like, um, I think in some ways a very, very good film,

the Oliver Parker film with an Ideal Husband that stars Rupert Everett,

um, as Lord Goring, who's the most kind of Oscar Wilde figure in some ways in the play.

He's the kind of Lee dandy that film starts with, um, Rupert Everett as, um.

Lord Goring in bed with a woman, and it's like, that's in the opening credits of the film.

So in some ways it's going okay. Set aside your assumptions, and then later brings them back in.

So there's a scene later in that film where, um, it's in the film at a point when, um, there's a,

the suspicion is awaking in the wife's mind that the husband is involved, has been blackmailed, is something else,

um, that the bit of dialogue is transposed in the film in front of the end of The Importance of Being Earnest,

together with the curtain speech by Wilde that was taken from Lady Windermere's Fan.

So it's a kind of car crash of different, anachronistic references.

Um, but in that, um, The Politician's Wife looks at Oscar Wilde, looks at her husband, and says, is there something you're not telling me?

So there's a way in which if you look at Wilde's plays, so many of them are about hidden secrets.

They're about sins in the past. They're about questions of judgement and rehabilitation.

And obviously the idea of sexual sin and the sexual double life runs through them in all sorts of

ways at the same time as what Wilde is doing in so many of those plays is using what was a very,

very well-established and incredibly popular dramatic form of the time,

which was commonly known as the fallen woman play, or the play about the woman with a past.

So the most famous of those was probably, um, Alexandra Duma um the Younger's play Latimer,

Camellia, The Lady of the camellias, which then becomes Cammie,

becomes La Traviata, etc. it's a play in which a young woman who is working as a prostitute falls in love with a young man,

and then, um, his his father begs her to give up.

Um, the association is ruining the young man. And then she, sure enough, does.

So um, lets him think that she wasn't in love with him at all and then dies tragically.

And there are endless 19th century plays by Pinero, by Henry Arthur Jones, and so on.

Plays like The Profligate, The Second Mrs. Tanqueray, The Notorious Mrs. EB Smith, The Case of Rebellious Susan, Saints and Sinners,

The Liars, Mrs. Dean's Defence I could give you like 60 of these straight off from the period of the 1870s, 1880s, 1890s.

It became kind of the genre on stage. And what these plays all have in common are there are plays in which women have had sex outside of marriage.

It is their dark secret. And in the course of those plays, they are ident that is identified,

they are judged for it and they are expelled from society, or at the very least, deeply humiliated.

Um, and their marriage to any good man is cut off.

So that was the standard form of drama that was about the policing of sexuality,

the policing of moral, um, disobedience or lack of social orthodoxy and so on.

A lot of it's about policing of women. So the fact that you have a huge number of plays about women daring to have sex outside of marriage,

it's not coincidental because the number of them that, um, in some way seem to be espousing some kind of idea of self-definition or liberation

or interest in education or aspiration of belonging above their place or whatever.

Um, so the idea that you distract that what you've got is women campaigning for greater

rights in this period and you turn it back into women need male protection,

um, or they will go wrong. They will fail in all sorts of epic ways now.

And what will does with those plays is rewrite them. He takes the form and he turns it into something different.

So and all of the contemporary reviewers recognise that he's nicking bits from French plays that are full of one place,

um, from contemporary plays, and then he rewrites them into something subtly different.

So, for example, in Lady Windermere's Fan, his first big break out West End success in that play, you have the education.

The young wife Lady Windermere never finds out that her mother, Mrs.

Mrs. Lynde, the wicked woman who she thinks is having an affair with her husband.

It's actually her own mother who left her father years before.

So in one sense, it seems to be a play in which Mrs. Lynn, the wicked woman, repents and redeems herself by rescuing her daughter from a near affair,

brings her back into the marriage, and then leaves at the end of the play for the continent.

But importantly, Mrs. Alyn is the most grown up character in that play.

Lord Windermere, who thinks he is the protective, all knowing man.

It's kind of a prig and a dunce and ends the play at a point.

He's the one who knows that Mrs. Allen is actually this fallen woman, this mother who abandoned her child and went off and had a lover.

Um, and he ends the play, one of my favourite. Like this.

Just a sign of the way in which world subverts these little moments of judgement.

So this is a moment at which he. Says to Mrs. Lim.

Um, his wife has gone off to fetch a picture of herself, a photograph of herself and a young child, um, for Mrs. Olin.

Windermere turns to his mother in law and says, I wish at the same time she would give you a miniature she kisses every night before she prays.

It is the miniature of a young, innocent girl with beautiful dark hair.

Now that's a cutting reference. This is what he's saying is there's a photo that my wife treasures of the woman who was her mother.

Young, beautiful, innocent. And what Windermere is saying to Mrs. Allen is that is the.

That is who you should be.

This is a moment in any of the other plays on this topic where Mrs. Olin would then go, oh, I have lost my innocence, I am worthless.

Whereas she replies coolly, ah, yes, I remember how long ago that seems.

It was done before I was married. Dark hair and an innocent expression was a fashion.

Then Windermere. So it's a beautiful response in which what she does is say.

Yes, I looked young and innocent with dark hair back then. It's hopefully a cutting little reference to your dyeing your hair now.

And she basically says, how do you know I wasn't dying my hair then?

And then your separation between the innocent young girl I was and this sort of corrupt thing I supposedly am now she's saying, actually had you.

I'm the same woman I ever was. I was always playing.

I was always present thinking, how can you judge me? How can you know me?

So it's a wonderful tiny little flick back of contempt.

It's a wonderful denial of all that. It's a moment that does not pin her down, but rather denies judgement.

And the play is absolutely full of those kind of rewrites. So misses a limb here.

Played by Marion Terry. Um, who? Um, Clement Scott, who is one of the really conservative critics at the time,

declared of her performance as Mrs. in that never before did Good Woman play bad woman so well,

um, the whole play critiques the very notion of good and bad, and the idea that you can identify and label people as such.

So it's a wonderful example of Clement Scott really not listening.

Um, and an awful lot of critics are outraged by this play, by the fact that Mrs. Lynn leaves in possession of a very rich new husband.

So. And she refuses repentance. She mocks it as something that people do in silly modern novels.

Um, and in that sense, she issues repentance, she issues motherhood, and she leaves as a thoroughly original character within literature of the time.

So in that sense, it's a play that engages with sexual judgement and then rejects it.

In the case of a woman of No Importance Wilde, it's a play in which you have a woman who encounters.

She's an unmarried mother who's passing off as a respectable widow while wearing black and deeply repent,

seeming to deeply repent, who then encounters the father of her child.

Um. That at first, um, she's the one who looks like she's going to lose her son to his corrupting influence.

This is the role played by, um, Herbert Beerbohm Tree.

And in the end, he is reduced to proposing marriage to her, and she rejects him.

Now, when reviewers said that this was a play that was about criticising the double standard and the judgement of women for what men were forgiven,

he responded that several plays would be written lightly about them.

What would deal with the monstrous injustice of the social code of morality at the present time?

It is indeed a burning shame that there should be one law for men and another law for women.

I think there should be no law for anybody.

Um, and that's one way I would urge you to have a look at the play and see how far it plays with those kind of melodramatic structures of judgement.

How far you can see it is an Ibsen rejection of one standard for men and another for women,

and how far it's a study of morality and laws around sexuality and behaviour,

as simply that laws and operation of power, the remains of control not just of men over women,

but of women, over men of women protecting their place in society.

How far this idea of no law for anybody, because he's showing how power works and how sexual morality is just another form of that.

It's a form of the operation of power and the constriction and destruction, the human being.

It's also a brilliant work of kind of post-modernist self performing irony.

So there are all sorts of ways in which you have characters in dialogue, almost from different plays that Mrs.

Um, Mrs. Albus, not the repentant fallen woman who spends the whole play wearing black, um,

but as performed by Mrs. Bernard Bear, very close fitting, luxurious black velvet with a very plunging neckline.

So there are all sorts of ambiguities about how that sort of form of repentance is playing through it,

and the damage that's done by those laws to individual psyche.

So then you have Wilde's glorious last play, The Importance of Being Earnest, which,

again, great work has been done on it by Christopher Croft and various other critics.

On pointing out the gay subtext in the play. It's a play that's all about people leading a double double life, about pretending to be earnest,

um, about leading a double life and lying and concealing what you're up to.

And it's absolutely full of puns and indeed, gay puns.

Um, but it's a double life that is celebrated.

It's a wonderful form of a farce in which people have lied and created lives, and Cecily and Gwendolyn have their own lives.

And there's Gwendolyn was, um, lying to go off to see Ernest.

There's Cecily, his diary. They both write their own fictions.

Jack has his Bunbury. Um, in that sense, they all have double lives.

They all create their selves. At the end of the play, it all comes true.

There is no correction of the lies. There's this wonderful, glorious granting of whatever your fiction was.

You get to have it. It's a fantastic kind of having your cake and eat it ending.

And one of my favourite bits right at the end of the play, Jack, having discovered that he really is called Ernest, turns to Gwendolyn and says,

Gwendolyn, it's a terrible thing for a man to realise that all his life he has been telling nothing but the truth.

Can you forgive me? And Gwendolyn returns Jack and says, of course I feel you are sure to change.

So it's the idea that, um. What? Gwendolyn is not that marriage at the end of that play does not represent, from now on, telling the truth.

It represents allowing each other's lies. There's a wonderful way in which he rewrites the entire form of farce.

It's a play in which the women are as desiring as the men.

Um, they're not the the straight full for them.

They're absolutely engaged in the same games. And this accepting and knowing in it.

It's a play in which gender roles play around. The women do the proposing, the women are the ones in charge.

Um, whereas the men in the interrogation, the interrogation, the um interview scene of Lady Bracknell with Jack,

he admits that he knows nothing and she approves thoroughly of that.

Um, he also admits that he smokes and she says, excellent.

A man should have an occupation of some kind.

There are far too many idle young men in in London, so men's role in that play is basically to be ignorant and decorative.

Um. Algy arrives to the wing for the weekend with um three portmanteau address in case two boxes and a large luncheon basket.

So. And he's he's always overdressed. That's a scent to it.

So the kind of gender roles are shifting around in that play,

along with all the jokes about silver cigarette cases, which Wilde gave to a lot of his lovers.

Um, but it's also a play in which language itself puns around and reverses.

So, um, when. Algy admits that Bunbury has been completely exploded.

Lady Bracknell thinks he's been a victim of a revolutionary outrage when Jack announces when Cecily runs up to Jack and says,

you could never guess who's come to stay. Your brother Ernest.

Um. And Jack says, but I haven't got a brother. Cecily immediately says, oh, but you know, whatever he's done, he's still your brother.

So that's whatever somebody says. They let the truth out and somebody else picks it up and turns it into something else.

Language in that play is gymnastic. It's a brilliant, anarchic world of self-creation,

in which the wild rewrites the structure of the farce, to approval, to facilitate, to validate lies,

self-creation and the freedom of self-expression, to validate double lives and fantasies, um, and to explode the strictures of Victorian morality.

It's an extraordinary and wonderful play, and it's gay in every possible meaning of the term, and utterly wonderful.

And I would buy, if you can get hold of it. So there's an end to live recording of the latest National Theatre production of it,

which is also now running in the West End, with Stephen Fry as Lady Bracknell.

I'm slightly dubious about men playing Lady Bracknell, just because there are so few stonking,

brilliant roles for women that when men appropriate them I'm slightly worried, but it's a production to see if you get a chance.

It's Max Webster production of The Importance of Being Earnest, I think, is a glorious celebration of exactly all of this in the play.

But next week I will be doing Wilde's plays in more detail, looking in particular an ideal husband.

But that's it for this week. Thank you.

