[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
Good afternoon everyone. Hi everyone.

Let's make a start. My name is Fergus McGhee and this is a lecture for prelims paper 1b, introduction to literature.

And it's on the subject of paraphrase. Paraphrase is one of the most ancient tools in the critic's toolbox.

We're going to consider the history of paraphrase, the long tradition of hostility towards it in literary criticism,

and whether it might nonetheless have its virtues and its uses.

So to do this, we need to grapple with some fairly fundamental questions about literary study. Questions that may seem simple,

but that turn out to have quite profound consequences for the ways in which we think and write about literature.

Questions like how do we decide what a text is about?

What is the relationship between form and content?

How do we, as critics, find the words that will clarify and enrich and enliven our experience of literature

and open that experience to others? And how might techniques of paraphrase change what we see and what we hear in a text, for better or worse?

Well, let's begin with a definition. Paraphrase simply means this.

Rendering the sense of some piece of language, could be an expression, a sentence, a poem, or even a whole book, in different words.

A paraphrase, then, is a rewording.

The critic Jeff Donovan suggests that the most tireless purveyors of paraphrase today are the search engines working in

reverse as they seek to channel the enormous variety of queries towards the sites that everyone means or discovers they mean.

So here is a typical example. Okay, so this suggests why we might want to be a little bit wary of paraphrase.

Or at the very least, we should be alert to the intentions manifest in paraphrase to what it's being used for.

Now, those uses might vary considerably, and they're not always as nefarious as this one.

Writing in the first century,

the Roman rhetorician Quintilian recommended that students of rhetoric should paraphrase poetry as part of their training as orators.

The lofty inspiration of verse serves to elevate the orator style,

and the bold license of poetic language does not preclude our attempting to render the same words in the language natural to prose.

Nay, we may add the figure of oratory to the thoughts expressed by the poet, make good his omissions, and prudent his diffuse ness.

But I would not have paraphrase restrict itself to the bare interpretation of the original.

Its duty is rather to rival and vie with the original in the expression of the same thoughts.

So here we have the idea of recasting the poet's thoughts into prose, invigorating and even improving upon them in the process.

What results is a kind of interpretation of the original. You're explaining something in your own words,

but there's also the intention here of trying to outdo the original to give the same thoughts, a rival expression.

In the early modern period, the most important paraphrases in English were those of scriptural texts such as the paraphrase of the New Testament,

which Erasmus had performed in Latin, and which was then translated into English by Nicholas Udall and others in the 16th century.

Here the paraphrase is not offered in competition with the original.

That would be quite bold, given that the author is understood to be Almighty God.

Instead, it's about making a text plain and easy to understand.

So Udall writes in his preface, for a paraphrase is a plain setting forth of a text or sentence more at large,

with such circumstance of more and other words, as may make the sentence open, clear, plain, and familiar,

which otherwise should perchance seem bare, unfruitful, hard, strange, rough, obscure, and dark.

To understand it. And you can see the list of synonyms here actually performing the task of paraphrase that he's describing.

And what is this but a kind of exposition? Yeah. And that of the most pithy and effectual sort.

Paraphrase here is about accessibility. Making something understandable to as wide an audience as possible.

But it's also about rhetorical forcefulness, about landing a message, bringing it home to readers hearts and minds.

In both these cases, then paraphrase is not something mechanical or value neutral.

It's laden with particular values and intentions.

And I point that up because a lot of muddled thinking about paraphrase and contemporary

critical discussions arises from the failure to recognise the importance of use and value.

So if we ask is paraphrase useful? Well, it depends on what you're trying to do with it.

And that in turn shows us what you value about the text.

So these early rationales for paraphrase are particularly useful because the issue

of value is very much more on the surface than it often is in modern discussions.

Let's take a look at the poet John Dryden's preface to his own reworking, his reworking of Shakespeare's play Troilus and Cressida,

which was published just eight years or so, uh, after Shakespeare's play was first performed.

Dryden writes,

the tongue in general is so much refined since Shakespeare's time that many of his words and more of his phrases are scarce intelligible,

and of those which we understand.

Some are ungrammatical, others coarse, and his whole style is so pestered with figurative expressions that it is as affected as it is obscure.

Yet. After all, because the play was Shakespeare's and that there appeared in some places, all of it the admirable genius of the author,

I undertook to remove that heap of rubbish under which many excellent thoughts lay wholly buried.

So Dryden believes he has refined Shakespeare's language and made it more intelligible.

He's extracted some excellent thoughts from the scrap heap of Shakespeare's overblown artifice,

his coarse and ungrammatical expressions, his deplorable affectations and obscurities.

Now, needless to say, Dryden's judgement here has not stood the test of time.

A sense of what constitutes correct taste and good manners.

It's certainly a very narrow one.

Or his assumption that nothing at all valuable is lost in the course of his pruning and placings is not very convincing.

You may have come across a modern series of books called Shakespeare Made Easy.

And the idea there is to translate or paraphrase Shakespeare's plays into simple modern English.

So, for example, Hamlet's great lines. Thus conscience does make cowards of us all.

And thus the native hue of resolution is sickly. Draw with the pale cast of thought becomes.

That's why our intelligence makes us all cowards, and why our determination,

normally so healthy looking, takes on a sickly power through thinking overmuch about precise details.

It's a real surprise to find, upon counting, that this paraphrase is exactly the same length as the original, because Shakespeare's punchy,

poetic rhythms have been replaced with cumbersome prose in which the much more uneven distribution of

stressed syllables and the laboriously parenthetical syntax give an impression of painful explanation.

Well, it's because of this, and also because of that, and in brackets this rather than confident declaration.

Thus it does, and thus it is what is lost in the transition from conscience to intelligence,

resolution to determination, thought to thinking native to normal.

All these new terms have a slightly different force and a slightly different range of associations.

And of course, it's not just a matter of examining the individual word changes.

Cowards loses its accusing emphasis when it's no longer bitingly obliterated with conscience and the metaphor

of resolution as having a complexion fearfully pallid or healthily ruddy is much more vivid and immediate.

When we're presented with a metaphorical image, before we're told what it's an image of.

As in Shakespeare, the native hue of resolution.

To say that a face takes on a sickly pallor is a rather cool and detached observation,

compared to the agitated, imaginative ness of saying that it's sick,

or a phrase which seems to animate the sickness with a malicious agency and express all the fascination of disgust.

We could go on and on here, even comparing such tiny details as how with has become through in the final line,

and what that does to make it land different. The trouble with this paraphrase, then, is that it hasn't thought nearly enough about precise details.

Looking at examples like this, we can begin to see why there's been a strong tradition of hostility towards paraphrase and literary criticism,

not least on the part of poets themselves. Now this hostility often gets pinned on the 19th century.

The philosopher Peter Kivi says it reeks of romanticism.

And you might think, well, so what? But in fact,

while the Romantics certainly have a big part to play in this story is a lazy historical generalisation to

suppose that everyone was perfectly comfortable with the practice of paraphrase prior to the 19th century.

In fact, an anxiety about paraphrase has existed across many different times and cultures.

Take, for example, the fascinating debate in medieval Islam around the doctrine of the inadmissibility of the Quran.

Ejaz ul Koran. The idea here being that the Koran cannot be successfully imitated, no one can match it for beauty and power.

Which leads to the idea that the particular words and sentences of the Koran are not simply containers for precious thoughts,

which would make the language of the Koran itself disposable. We've got the thoughts, so we no longer need the wrappings they came in,

but rather that it matters very much how those thoughts are shaped and dramatised in its language.

And this is an idea developed in a very sophisticated way by the 11th century Persian grammarian Al George.

As Laura Harb explains, androgyny locates the source of beauty in speech in three elements the idea itself,

the individual words chosen in the phrase that expresses it, and the way these words are strung together.

All these elements come together to create a unique image or form of a given idea, something he calls Seurat al mana, the image or form of meaning.

So I mentioned this as a way of troubling the assumption that worries about paraphrase, uh, are a uniquely modern phenomenon.

Let's take another example. Here is the English Renaissance scholar Roger Asham.

In 1570. It is a bold comparison indeed.

To think to say better than that is best. Such turning of the best into worse is much like the turning of good wine out of a fair,

sweet flagon of silver into a foul, musty bottle of leather, or to turn pure gold and silver into foul brass and copper.

You'll notice the ashes moves from the idea that language is a more or less beautiful vessel for a particular content,

to the idea that changing the language actually changes the substance of what's said.

It changes gold and silver into brass and copper.

It's a kind of reverse alchemy.

And that brings us to the romantic poet Coleridge, who offers one of the most memorable articulations of unease about paraphrase.

It would be scarce the more difficult, he says, to push a stone out from the pyramids with a bare hand,

then to alter a word or the position of a word in Milton or Shakespeare in their most important works,

at least without making the author say something else or something worse.

And he does say. Now there are two interesting claims here.

One is that altering the words or the position of the words can make a text say something else than it does say.

The other is that this is a sign of literary excellence.

It's only very rarely, Coleridge says, perhaps only in the most important works of Milton and Shakespeare, that this holds true.

So let's take these claims and turn and put them to the test.

The first claim is that apparently even even apparently insignificant words or apparently

insignificant choices like the position of a word can contribute to what attack says.

Now I want to detach that from Coolidge's second claim,

because it's not difficult to show that this is a case in a very complex passage from Milton or Shakespeare,

as we saw earlier with with hamlet Made Easy. I want to make things a bit harder for myself to test Coleridge's claim against a more difficult case.

So let's take a really downright plain speaking poem.

How about some a houseman? This is I to my perils.

I to my perils of cheat and charmer. Came clad in armour by stars.

Benign hope lies to mortals. And most believe her.

But man's deceiver was never mine. The thoughts of others were light and fleeting.

Of lovers meeting or luck or fame. Mine were of trouble and mine were steady.

So I was ready when trouble came. The critic Christopher Ricks writes that everyone seems to take it for granted that

husband's poems unwaveringly endorse the pessimistic beliefs which they assert.

To me, his poems are remarkable for the ways in which rhythm and style temper or mitigate or criticise what,

in bold paraphrase the poem would be saying.

So I suppose the paraphrase here would be something like other people are easily taken in, but I've always expected the worst of folk.

So I was well equipped for danger when it inevitably arrived.

Rick's remarks. The poem says a glum, cramping thing, but how does it say it?

Um, sorry, I don't have this on the screen. How does it say it? With gaiety and wit.

The. Ah, if you like, utterly inappropriate.

Instead of the steady tramp of military fortitude, there's the exquisite interlacing of a dance instead of granite rhymes.

There is a subtle effrontery and insouciance that links charmer and armour,

and in so doing opposes something to the simple sturdiness, the inaugurated hopelessness of armour.

It says that the thoughts of others were light and fleeting, while mine were of trouble.

But whatever the poem may say in its natural human wish to find armour for itself, to find steadiness, this cannot be the case.

The movement itself is light and fleeting, and not just in the lines about others.

Rick shows us here, as elsewhere in his work, how to be alert to the ways in which word choice,

syntax, linear tone, imagery, rhythm, rhyme all richly contribute to how meaning is perceived.

Shaping ebbs and flows of feeling, inflecting an utterance with a particular social or conceptual nuance,

dramatising modulations of moods, conflicts of attitude, invisible assumptions, glinting hesitations.

Coleridge made this explicit with reference to word choice I include in the meaning of a word, he explains, not only its corresponding object,

but likewise all the associations which it recalls for language is framed to convey, not the object alone,

but likewise the character, mood, and intentions of the person who is representing it.

So language both particularised as things like character, mood and intention.

And through the associations it recalls, embeds these in a rich and volatile medium, shared across persons and across time.

George Eliot makes a very similar point very elegantly in an essay from the 1850s.

Suppose she writes that the effort which has been again and again made to construct a universal language on a rational basis,

has at length succeeded, and that you have a language which has no uncertainty, no winds of idiom, no compass forms,

no fitful shimmer of many huge significance, no hoary arc isms familiar with forgotten years,

a patent deodorise and non resonant language which affects the purpose of communication as perfectly and rapidly as algebraic signs.

Your language may be a perfect medium of expression to science, but will never express life, which is a great deal more than science.

It's not impossible to imagine such language says. It's just that its uses might be rather limited.

And we'll need to keep going back to this question of use.

But first, let's deal with Coleridge's other point that resistance, to paraphrase, is a mark of literary quality.

As we saw for Coleridge, it's a mark of very high quality indeed.

It is barely possible, he said, to attain the ultimatum, which I have ventured to propose as the infallible test of a blameless style,

namely its untranslatable ness in words of the same language without injury to the meaning.

Let me get to the 20th century.

It's more common to claim the untranslatable Merce, or resistance, to paraphrase, is the hallmark of literary ness or poetry as such.

So not just the greatest poetry, but any poetry worthy to name.

Here's the Russian poet mandelstam in 1933, where one finds commends your ability with paraphrase.

There the sheets have not been rumpled. Their poetry has not, so to speak.

Spent the night. Similarly, in a very influential essay of 1947 titled The Heresy of Paraphrase, the American critic Clarence Brookes,

one of the so-called New Critics who shaped the teaching of English literature in the mid-20th century,

insisted on the resistance which any good poem sets up against all attempts.

To paraphrase it. I think we can see what they're getting out here.

We've all read poems. Maybe we've even written poems that feel flabby or banal or clumsily expressed poems,

some of whose elements maybe seem incongruous or redundant in some way.

Perhaps they're so desperate to get a message across that they repeat themselves in a lumbering or overbearing manner.

Or maybe they're so desperate to be artistic that the patterns they make seem simply empty or mechanical.

Maybe the poets just shoving, in a word, here to fill up the metre, a word there to match a rhyme, or if it's free verse,

maybe the line ending seemed random and inane,

as though there's no discernible reason for chopping up the lines except to say, look at me, I'm a poem.

But even in these cases, I want to suggest the very sloppiness is part of the way we experience the poem.

And I say poem, but this applies to any kind of literature.

So I want to challenge the second half of code, which is arguments, by running a little experiment.

I've gone in search of a really awful poem, and I want to see to what extent a bad poem might resist paraphrase as much as a good one.

So here's my victim. This is the first stanza of the Victorian writer John Closest poem.

And have we lost another friend? As you can see, it's introduced as composed in respectful memory of Mrs. Yaka.

And there's an epigraph from the Bible. There is one glory of the sun and another glory of the moon, and another glory of the stars.

For one star different from another star in glory. So acute up here for something very profound, very moving.

This is an elegy with high metaphysical ambitions.

Mystical ambitions, perhaps. And what we get is this.

And have we lost another friend? How sad. The news to tell.

Alas, poor Mrs. York has gone. Hark to the tolling bell!

Alas! How many now? Drop off? What numbers are unwell?

Another mortal born away. Hark to the tolling bell.

Now, I think this is quite fabulously bad, but I don't think it's bad because we can paraphrase it.

Its clanging crassness, its achieve tactless ness is very much accomplished by the way in which it's said.

We feel it in the disjunction between, on the one hand, the official earnestness of the dedication and the solemnity and cosmic scope of the epigraph.

And on the other hand, the jaunty ness of the metre,

the pathetic swings of tone from the casual flippancy of drop off to the pompous poetical ness of another mortal born away,

or the way that poor Mrs. York is swiftly left behind for the emotional detachment and statistical abstract ness of what numbers are well.

There's the embarrassing theatricality and artificial feeling of all those straining exclamation marks, alas, which give it almost a camp air.

If you know Susan Sontag's definition of camp as failed seriousness,

so that we feel almost a kind of tenderness for the way it tries so excruciatingly hard to live up

to the moment while betraying a chilly nonchalance underneath these elaborate mourning clothes.

Then there's the clunky gesture of chiming Hark to the tolling bell, Hark to the tolling bell.

And even the way it begins. And have we lost another friend?

Makes this speaker sound more peeved than dismayed. To lose one friend may be a misfortune, but to lose such numbers off them looks like carelessness.

In other words, the particular faults of this poem would not be captured by simple paraphrase.

We can only detect its faults by paying attention to the kinds of features that paraphrase tends to screen out.

In Coleridge's terms, the poem is untranslatable without injury to the meaning, although that doesn't seem to guarantee its success.

Now, one could, of course, make the argument that this is a highly ironic or satirical poem.

Maybe John Carlos couldn't stand the sight of Mrs. Parker the metre after all.

So it was a somewhat inquiring emphasis on friend in that first line.

And have we lost another friend? As if to say, well, was she a friend?

But this again would mean that its success depends on something quite different from whether it can be paraphrased.

And in fact, one finds Victorian reviewers applying Coleridge's criterion all the time, not as evidence of poetic success, but proof of failure.

A review of one particularly gruesome effort, Witheringly observed that no language can do justice to the Prince of Panama by Captain Adderly Slay.

But its own it speaks all too damningly for itself.

There's nothing else to be said.

So this suggests that our ability to paraphrase a poem is not an indication of its quality, however tempting that thought might be.

It's perhaps more helpful to think of our ability to paraphrase a poem, a function of the kind of attention we choose to give it.

As the philosopher Peter Lamarque puts it, specifications of what a poem is about.

Common degrees of fine grained ness according to the interest served in making the specification.

Just say that again. Specifications of what a poem is about.

Common degrees of fine greenness according to the interest served in making the specification.

So if you wanted to know which side won the football match last night,

you're probably not deeply concerned whether the headline reads Garner, slaughter Blues or Maresca squad outclassed by Arsenal.

Although a literary critic could furnish you with a stunningly sensitive and perceptive account of the difference between these two statements.

But the critics good services wouldn't really be called for if all you wanted to know was who won the match?

With the poem. By contrast, I mean a gloss or summary would be a rotten substitute for the poet's careful arrangement of particular words,

because it's the very experience of those words that's meant to be relished and savoured and pondered and lived with.

So the question is always what do we want from paraphrase? What are we using it to do and what do we want from poetry?

And how much of what we want from poetry is served by the technique of paraphrase?

Modernist poetry is particularly instructive in this regard,

because it's constantly reminding us that poems are playing a different game with language than a newspaper report or contract,

or an act of Parliament. How, for instance, we won't go about paraphrasing this poem by EE Cummings when by now and tree by leaf,

she laughed his joy, she cried, his grief followed by snow and stir by still anyone's.

And it was all to her.

In a poem like this, meaning it clearly isn't some kernel that can be extracted from the shell of the poem and rearranged in a paraphrase,

but neither is meaning absent. We might want to say that meaning in this poem is constantly emergent and in flux.

Words are pushed out of their ordinary habits and committers in wild and unexpected ways.

With a poem like this, we might need to ask not what is this poem about?

But how is this poem discovering?

In other words, as Angela Leighton inquires, how does the poem reorganise the very ways in which we might discover it?

Adam Phillips suggests that there is or there can be a difference between reading something intelligible and reading

something that has a powerful effect between words as as procurers of experiences and words as consolidators of knowledge.

Poems like Cummings warn us off the idea that poetry is just a fancy way of saying plain things,

as the rhymes, rhythms and metaphors were just ways of sprucing up plain and simple thoughts.

And if we value the experience of poetry, that's something we might take to heart in encountering any poem,

not just the highly experimental like Cummings. The great 20th century philosopher Ludwig Wittgenstein advises as never to forget that a poem,

even though it is composed in the language of information, is not used in the language game of giving information.

That's not the point. Or, as the critic William Empson puts it, you can get nothing from literature without in some degree, enjoying it.

It is no use treating it as a mere mass of information, because then you don't get the essential information.

Every reader has to remake it in his own feelings.

No one else, including any I chatterbot can feel it for you.

So where does all this leave? Paraphrase. Well, it clarifies what it can and can't do for poetry.

As Peter Covey writes, it's a criterion of success is reproduction of the poem's total effect on the reader.

It is nonsensical because it demands of paraphrase, something that never was the object of the exercise in the first place.

Paraphrase isn't designed to replace the poem or to measure up to it in every possible dimension.

Nevertheless, the modest claim that we can say in plain words,

more or less what the content of a poem is, seems an unobjectionable one in many, if not all cases.

Brooks, himself the great antagonist of paraphrase, acknowledges this.

The point is, surely not, he writes, that we cannot describe adequately enough for many purposes what the poem in general is about.

The rape of the Loch is about the foibles of an 18th century bell.

Now, this might not be a particularly subtle description of Alexander Pope's poem.

There's plenty about the poem it doesn't capture. We might quibble even with what it does say.

And we certainly wouldn't trade in Pope's poem for this threadbare little statement about it, but it's a reasonable description.

Which can't necessarily be said for this lovely little summary of The Wizard of Oz that appeared in a newspaper some years ago.

Transported to a surreal landscape. A young girl kills the first person she meets and then teams up with three strangers to kill again.

You might be just a bit disappointed with the film if that's what you go in expecting.

So the very fact or paraphrases can be more or less reasonable, more or less informative suggests that paraphrase itself is not a chimaera.

It's possible to paraphrase well or to paraphrase badly.

In this case, deliberately bad day for comic effect.

But to go back to Brooks, he says, we can very properly use paraphrases as pointers and as shorthand references,

provided that we know what we are doing right. But it is highly important that we know what we are doing.

Absolutely. And that we see plainly that the paraphrase is not the real core of meaning, which constitutes the essence of the poem.

Notice at the end here I think that Brooks leads us astray. And so, in my view,

it's unfortunate that his essay has become so prominent in the discussion of

paraphrase because it makes proper caution about paraphrase too easy to dismiss.

Take his expressions, the real core of meaning and the essence of the poem.

Elsewhere. In the same essay, he talks about the internal and essential structure which prompts the question

is this thing a formal structure or a metaphysical essence or a meaning?

And what's a core of meaning? It sounds like it's buried somewhere mysterious.

Brooks can't actually point to any of these things.

They don't pick out anything about the poem, so he gives the impression that he's concerned with something peculiarly occult.

Even more unfortunately, this talk of something inner or core reproduces the very same conceptual blunder that he accuses the naive

paraphrases with making this idea that the poem's words are just a wrapper for the goodies they enclose.

The great Shakespearean critic A.C. Bradley showed how he might avoid that kind of binary thinking by

suggesting that we think of the poem as a unity in which you can no more separate a substance and a form,

than you can separate living blood and the life in the blood.

This unity has, if you like, various aspects or sides, but they are not factors or parts.

If you try to examine the one, the substance of the form, you find it is also the other.

So form and substance or form and content, as we tend to say nowadays or for Bradley, things we can distinguish for the purposes of analysis.

But when we do so, we need to think of them as different aspects of the poem, rather than two separate elements that are somehow welded together.

It's a subtle distinction, but an important one. He's suggesting that when we think about content, about what's the poem that the text is about,

we should be thinking about the exact way in which it's shaped in this particular text.

And when we're thinking about form, we ought to think about what precisely is achieved by the text,

formal features as they interact with each other and as they unfold in our reading of the text.

What the poet George often calls the order of disclosure upon which the poem depends.

A poem isn't a static object. It's something that unfolds in time, and the order of unfolding affects the meaning.

Now, there's no hesitation in Bradley about whether the unity of form and content is a property of the poem, or even.

And here's the ghost of Coleridge, a property of great poetry.

Or whether, as I suggested, we might think of this unity as a kind of heuristic, that is,

as a condition that we impute to the poem an assumption that we apply in order to enjoy it as poetry.

This is to make a claim about value rather than a claim about language.

I'm proudly staked his claim firmly in this ground when he declares that poetry is an end in itself is worth having on its own account.

It has an intrinsic value. Now, this is not to say, of course, that it doesn't have any other kind of value.

Literature can have all sorts of kinds of value moral, historical, conceptual, political, philosophical,

but broadly wants to say that the value of poetry is not exhausted by its payoffs in these terms,

saying that a poem has intrinsic value in this way needn't mean turning it into an object of worship, before which we kneel in reverential silence.

On the contrary, it means coming to recognise the strange feeling that poems live, in John Wilkinson's words,

that they are entities sponsoring life in their readers emotional, cognitive and creative.

It is in fact, the recognition that the text has so much more to say to us than our narrow instrumental agendas often allowed.

As Michelle Chorley's writes in a challenging essay. When disciplines marshal their tools to interrogate a work of art.

We are right to wonder whether this commotion indeed serves a better, deeper, or more nuanced understanding of that work,

as is repeatedly claimed, or whether what we call an approach is not, in fact, a manner of avoidance.

What makes anyone approach useful is also precisely what marks its limitations.

That is, it overall organises our attention, and the risk is that we start seeing literature as a quarry to be mined.

For a wish list of things we've drawn up in advance, rather than allowing it to inspire and to change the questions we ask of it.

Paraphrase can pander to our least imaginative, critical impulses,

offering a way to make the text fit some preordained argument or theory and robbing it of all its rebellious strangeness.

But here's the twist because it paraphrase caters to our laziest instincts as critics.

I want to argue it can also make us better readers, and not just better readers of literature for its own sake,

in Bradley's terms, but better readers of literary contributions to moral, political, and historical inquiry.

Because the quality and distinctiveness of criticism, its contribution to those inquiries,

depends upon the extent to which it remains answerable to fine grained,

evocative, unambiguous games of meaning that distinguished literature as a cultural practice of writing and reading.

As Terry Eagleton writes a neoclassical poem which exploits the order, symmetry and equipoise of the heroic couplet,

a naturalistic drama which is forced to gesture offstage to realities it cannot credibly bring into view

a novel which gobbles its time sequence or shifts dizzyingly from one character's viewpoint to another.

All these are instances of artistic form as itself the bearer of moral or ideological meaning.

And this is true also at a more fine grained level than Eagleton imagines.

Here, a turn of phrase the structure of a sentence, a fractured dialogue, a flash of irony,

a tone, or an atmosphere can all be the bearers of moral or ideological meaning.

Paraphrase was one of the favourite critical tools of the critic William Empson,

best known for his virtuoso close readings that characterise his first book, Seven Types of Ambiguity, published in 1930.

Rather than using paraphrase to simplify or condense the sense of a text,

he uses it to tease out ambiguities to try out different interpretations of a passage,

not through third person commentary that we used to,

but by adopting the first person perspective of the poem's speaker or the poem's implied author, who might be slightly different, of course.

So here's an example from Seven Types of Ambiguity. Empson takes a seemingly very simple set of anonymous lines from the Oxford Book of English Verse.

Cupid is winged and doth range our country. So my love doth change.

But change ye earth, or change ye sky. Yet I will love her till I die.

Cupid is winged and doth range her country. So my love doth change.

But change the earth or change his sky. Yet I will love her till I die.

And then he offers the following catalogue of paraphrases. I will love her though.

She moves from this part of the earth to one out of my reach. I will love her though.

She goes to live under different skies. I will love her though she moves from this earth and sky to another planet.

I will love her though. She moves into a social or intellectual sphere where I cannot follow.

I will love her though. She alters the earth and sky. I have got no though she destroys the bubble of worship in which I am now living.

By showing herself unworthy to be its object. I will love her, though, being yet worthy of it.

By going away, she changes my earth into desire and unrest, and my heaven into despair.

I will love her even if she has both power and will, to upset both the orderly ideals of men in general,

heaven and society as a system of society in general earth.

She may alter the earth and sky she has now by abandoning her faith or in just punishment, becoming outcast and still will.

I love her. She may change my earth by killing me.

But till it comes I will go on loving. Your paraphrase opens a widening vista of possibilities for us to measure against our experience of the text.

It acts like one of Brooks's handy pointers, but goes beyond it.

By awakening us to the wide range of ways, we might take these deceptively straightforward words.

It doesn't betray the poem's complexity. It opens it up.

We don't move from the thickly embedded crosscurrents of a personal utterance towards a dedicated account of thought content.

Rather, as Helen Saving Siren writes in Empson.

Abstract thought tends to be given the form of a conversational remark structured around personal pronouns that imply speakers.

Colloquial paraphrase offers a way in which to explain poems without falling into the

discursive traps of explanation and without forfeiting the possibilities for nuance tone,

including stridency, its often stridency and Empson and swift social judgement that are inherent in the voice.

This use of paraphrase helps us to hear aspects of the poem anew.

It invites us with a canny or ironic twinkle, to measure the distance of its articulation from that of the poem,

as much as to admire its scrupulous fidelity to it, but it has further uses.

Take this example from Ibsen's later book Some Versions of Pastoral.

Amazon quotes a couple of lines from Andrew Marvell famous poem The Garden.

The speaker is talking about having retired from the busy life of the town to a country garden.

Meanwhile, the mind from pleasure less withdraws into its happiness.

Meanwhile, the mind from pleasure less withdraws into its happiness.

He then gets two ways of taking these rather complicated lines.

From pleasure less either from the lessening of pleasure.

We are quiet in the country that are dullness,

gives us sober and self knowing happiness more intellectual than that of the overstimulated pleasures of the town.

Or made less by this pleasure. The pleasures of the country give a repose and intellectual release.

Which make me less intellectual, make my mind less worrying and introspective.

So, in other words, he's saying we can read the term less as modifying either pleasure or the mind.

And rather than asking us to choose between these alternatives.

Empson observes that the ambiguity gives two meanings to pleasure,

corresponding to Marvel's Puritan ambivalence about it and to the opposition between pleasure and happiness.

The ambiguity which these paraphrases exfoliate reveals something about the wider conflict of attitudes and ideologies which this poem expresses well,

needn't dig behind or between the words to get to those conflicts they're hiding in plain sight.

Once we have the eyes to see them, or rather, the ears to hear them, a good paraphrase can give us such ears.

John Keats complains in one of his letters that speaking has the advantage of writing because one cannot write a wink or not,

or a grin or pass of the lips or smile. Lord.

One cannot put one's fingers to one's nose or jerky in the ribs, or lay hold your button in writing.

But in all the most lively and titillate parts of my letter, you must not fail to imagine me as the epic poet.

Say, now, here, now there now is one foot pointed at the ceiling, now with another.

Now with my pen on my ear. With my elbow in my mouth. Oh my friends, you lose.

The action and attitude is everything. And yet does not the word mum go for one's finger beside the nose?

I hope it does. Keats's thought runs on itself here at the end,

implicitly recognising the irony that all the while he is complaining about the inadequacy of print to convey an attitude and attitude,

remember means, first of all, a physical posture or stance, and by extension a mental or emotional disposition.

Keats is evoking light lightly, artfully, compellingly, with the resources of language alone, an intensely present and characterful sense of attitude.

And yet Keats is also right that the relations between written language and the particular tones and colours of a voice are often ambiguous.

In Middlemarch, which many of you will be reading this term.

The narrator observes how a few simple words can carry a wealth of different meanings, depending on the particular way in which they are voiced.

Lydgate has finally explained to Rosamond, his wife, all about his mounting debts, for which she is largely responsible.

What can I do? Tertius, said Rosamond, turning her eyes on him again.

That little speech of four words. Like so many others in all languages, is capable by varied vocal inflections of expressing all states of mind,

from helpless dimness to exhaustive argumentative perception, from the completist self devoting fellowship to the most neutral aloofness.

Rosamond then utterance threw into the words, what can I do?

As much neutrality as they could hold, they fell like a mortal chill on Lydgate Rose.

Tenderness. While noting the potential scope of Rothmans words,

Elliott's narrator tells us which particular attitude we are to breathe into them, and you can judge whether I did it justice or not.

We can hear Rosamund directly like a character on the stage, so we have to be told how she said,

sorry, we can't hear someone direct like a character on the stage. So we have to be told how she said something.

And the value in that here might be that we're encouraged to weigh this particular voicing against the other attitudes those same words might hold.

It makes us feel they're chilling us all the stronger in company with Lydgate.

But this also hints, I think, that the advantages that the silent, disembodied page might have over a particular performance,

especially where we have to do the work of analysing the possible varied vocal inflections ourselves.

This is the animating idea of Eric Griffith's great book, The Printed Voice of Victorian Poetry,

in which he argues the poetry of the period deliberately creates dilemmas of voicing.

These dilemmas keep us alive to the fact that because we don't know exactly how the speaker sounds, we can't know exactly how he feels.

Writing, as opposed to speech, allows for a searching multiplicity of attitude.

The Griffiths often explores through paraphrase. So I want to finish with an example from Griffiths.

Here is the last line of Tennyson's poem vastness, which is, Griffith says,

runs for 35 lines of torrential lament over the pointless cruelties of human life before coming to rest with the words peace,

let it be, for I loved and loved him forever. The dead are not dead, but alive.

Griffiths observes, Let It Be could be an amen to the pointless squandering of creation which the poem details.

It may resigned to the will of God, because at least that Will has not only permitted the love of Tennyson for his friend Hollis Callum,

but assured the eternity such love asks, or let it be, might decide to leave the whole mess of the world alone.

Turn from it with a sorrow barely distinguishable from disgust,

and concentrate instead of the world on an exceptional case of decency so exceptional that it cannot be thought

to be part of any scheme which would reorient all disasters by placing them in the light of a divine plan.

So the last hemi stitch that is the final close there. The dead are not dead, but alive.

Also achieves a sublime numbness of tone in print.

And here's what Griffiths deploys his paraphrases.

So partly, he says, this numbness of tone is due to the logical ambiguity of the colon, which introduces it.

So the colon could stand for it because it is because he is an immortal soul,

that he can be loved as I love him, or perhaps as the effect of a therefore.

It is in the perpetuity of love that the dead find their life.

In the former case, the feeling arises from a conviction.

In the latter, the conviction is produced by the feeling.

The numbness mainly comes from the absence of any indication of attitude in the line, such as might be supplied by how frightening or what joy.

So the line leaves us unsure how to take it. And that, Griffith says, is the whole point.

He concludes. Imagining such an indicator of attitude is absurd,

but we need to make such an act of imagination to see why somebody who confidently

opted for one of the possible indicators here would have missed the point of the poem.

This is not because it does not matter which indicator is supplied,

but because it is the absence of an indicator which needs to be precisely imagined.

So we can't say whether the poem achieves, uh, complete serenity or whether the poet gets it last, a surprise that may not be entirely pleasant.

We can speak the line so that it will make up Tennyson's mind and voice for him.

Indeed, says Griffiths, it is impossible to say it without either some tonal indication or an evident and deliberate avoidance of such indication,

whereas the written line neither drops hints nor maintains a poker face.

And all this configuration of feeling is Tennyson's.

All these feelings are packed into the line.

So I think this is a nice way of taking stock of the hazards and opportunities of paraphrase as a tool of critical practice.

We can use it to cut poetry down to a serviceable size, narrowing our experience of what it has to offer.

Or we can use it to open up that experience with words that seem to reach into and transform our very perceptions.

As James Longtum Barker, uh, suggests,

one reason we might turn to literature rather than history or philosophy or science is because we want to experience the sensation,

the sound of words leaping just beyond our capacity to know them.

Certainly. This is what makes criticism the very process of writing a place of opportunity, experiment, discovery.

And so, in that spirit,

I want to leave you with some words from the critic Michele Scholey that I hope will inspire your own critical adventures here at Oxford.

Criticism, he writes, is not a record of an experience that lies in the past and whose features await documentation.

It is rather the arena for developing the experience.

Thanks for listening.

