vision of the archive, like I think most she she said sco a lot when she's making that. So, like, you could just follow. I'm thinking next her, being like just have to have like a week or so, just like looking at how you actually read scholar. essay's button looking in the actual footnotes, which is something everybody is reluctant to do because it's very tedious and you just want to finish the thing you're reading. ?But in the footnotes are, in many respects the most helpful and instructive things about scholarly writing and theoretical writing because this is where you kind of see the drama of like the argument unfolded in any event, you can see that that haron is drawing a lot on like important works in like black studies, like saltw slavery, and like on the post post-cony, like that's an important work in post-conial studies, but also, like the stuff on PO, you could also point to like Walter Benamine has a, you know, famous essay on like theses of history, which like, as a famous line that every document of civilization is a document of barbarism. This is where this sort of like a kind of you're interested in that sort of genealogy, you could look at notes in an essay like this and like recover it and read more into it. So I just thought I would say that as well. ?Let's move on to critical fabulation. And I'm interested in defining critical fabulation and maybe just as a provocation that I offer just to demonstrate to try to, like raise the stakes and the drama of this conversation is like, I definitely have met people in the real world who are very skeptical of critical fabulation and we'll say, like, you're just making up, like, you can't just, like, make up history. Like, people will look. ?Like, I remember somebody. It might have been a v City Armms book, Wayward Lives, like, somebody I know, a historian, who's more of an acquaintance than a friend was like, just didn't take that book seriously because he was like, it's just like, it's completely made up stuff, so why would I read it? And I offered that, just to say to kind of like, again, create some drama in this conversation, but.. ?What is critical fabulation? Why is it like worthwhile and not, if you wanted to respond to my my acquaintance, who is super skeptical of it, yeah, like, what would you say? Where does its value lie? ?I could just sort of afford the argument that everything's by all history has to be made up in the circum critical population is still stuff from the hard to what happened. It's just more aware of the higher destanation or what it's. could be sure it could not be true in it. Yeah. ?Other other thoughts. Think maybe you also like critical fabulation emphasizes like like sort of like a balancing act between like like imagination and restraint. So like there's like this like ethics of like refusal like I think she mentions narrative restrain. ?So I feel like she really emphasises like not making up and not ignoring that there are gaps in the stories and using like the fact that there are silences and omissions to sort of like power and like, like as machinery for like her writing and her, like technique and theory. Yeah. you want to us to a passage, Isaac, or Hmm.. Yeah, but yeah, if you have one that on pitch 12, I think she writes. ?Page 12 which is I have your narrative restrain, the refusal to fill in the gaps and provide closure, but I'm not sure what page that is. the start of the second paragraph Yeah. So this would be like another way of putting this is that city of heart is insane, you can, like, tell any story.s she's not just inventing stories out of nothing. That yeah, I like how you describe that Isaac, like, combination of the critical fabulation involves this kind of complicated and interesting combination of imagination and restraint, and not merely filling the gaps in the archive, but refusing to fill those gaps. ?Why? Yeah, I guess like a question is, what is the danger? I mean, yeah, we have so many to get. ?Maybe let's I want I'll pose this question now a bit, but I ultimately I' address it right now, but like, are there it seems like they're also dangers that go along with critical fabulation, and I'm curious what those dangers are and why it's potentially dangerous to fill gaps and why you have to not fill gaps. But I want to hold off on the, and I want to continue kind of fleshing out what we understand critical fabulation to consist of, like, what is what are you trying to do? What are you hoping to accomplish when you're critically fabulating? ?Yeah, yeah. I have normally linked to trying to give a voice to the marginal. I don't know if that is how it is always used. ?I think that is matter. It could have long, maybe people work take off the wrong way and they use a representation. I think with like, considering that it isn't actual actual history and it is like, as said, it is like a mix of imagination and restraint. ?I think if people. like use it the wrong way, it could be potentially harmful because people might like, forget it not entirely factual. Yeah. Let's say more of it. ?I want to hear more about this. Like. And she has, okay, and maybe the way I'm getting into all this more concretely is to talk about her exact actual example of critical fabulation. ?And this, if I can find it, is on, is it on the No. Is it on? Am I, sorry, my notes are like, I was doing this thing where I was cutting and pasting, a lot of stuff, so it's all a little over in place. ?I think this is on page 8 for So page 8 is where she's reproducing the history of the death of two girls on board the recovery, this slave ship. And then.. I'm sorry, what are using this one? ?This is Venus and two. No, I know, but I couldn't. I found it like a sort of web and we find a document. ?Oh, okay. I can just email it to you. Um. ?Sorry. Um. Does somebody want to hunt down the actual, like passage where she does the critical fabulation? ?We're pictures out the relics are two girls, one crving the other innocence. the court and then places to stay with friends. Could you read that out what I'm doing? Okay. ?I wish pages? This is page eight, the third from the bottom program. Picture then, the relics of two girls, long crazy other hundred innoants. ?Sor caughtight to them and lighter said they were friends. Two world girls and a country needed each other's arms, bes their feet and the terror, there would be this too, the closest beauty, the instance of instant of possibility. So what is she trying to accomplish in Matt? ?moment, and sorry, I'm trying to email to you and I'm having like the world's artist. I'm dragging a document to into the email. Yeah, so what is she, like, Rhe just talked about some of the dangers, that, like, that critical fabulation might be a way of giving voice to someone who's dispossessed by historical forces. ?And I'm curious what the dangers of that are. Yeah. And whether that's the what H is attempting to do in a passage like this, I mean, the dangerous, but there's a sense of satisfaction that comes from it, and that, like, it's kind of a sol closure where imagine stuff is just pass it didn't happen. ?And then I kind of, I's about history with the president as well, which supposed be creating. So, like, our lack of ways, all historical system and present, we're talking to make a special consequences. It'sical population was just without the critical aspects marriage? ?Yes, it's very interesting. So there's one danger is a danger of complacency. One danger, I mean, we haven't, we probably didn't dwell on this long enough, but I couldn't deal at the point Dylan Ray earlier. ?It's also totally right that one of the purposes of critical fabulation is to demonstrate the, like the fact that all history is itself kind of fictional, the archive, even though it has the appearance of like a sort of empirical record of what has happened is in fact entangled in fiction and all these sorts of different ways. And so there's a danger, so a danger of critical population is like to is like making history scene more complete or something than it actually is. She does say at one point on page 12, she says, the intent of this practice is not to give voice to the slave. ?And so I guess I'm so in that sentence, it seems like the attempt to give voice to the slave is itself a form of like excess that critical p population indulsion. But why? Like, I think this is one thing that feels that feels kind of refreshingly out of step with our current, like, cultural moment where it feels like that's like in a lot of sort of like reparative, like, culture, whether that's like a movie or TV show, there's like a big or like a work of scholarship. ?There's like a big emphasis on trying to like give voice to those people who don't have voices. And so, but Harm is very much like, we don't want to do that. Like, I don't want to do that. ?So why doesn't she want to do that? It's just a paragraph that you tell You can her avo, you can get her voice, it's not. Like, it's the only thing the characterizing somebody is that you know nothing about, they make upset about them, changes that own characteristic. ?I feel like maybe also it can be like the impossibility of like representing the situation and the experience that they undergo. I think it might be the same problem in like holocaust literary studies, like the idea of representing like the impossible that they went through. So maybe like this idea of giving voice to the slave is sort of like speaking for their experience, even though we will never be able to like truly capture or understand what it's like. ?Yeah. Yeah, there's clearly an ethics here to like, there's, like a very sort of an incredibly self conscious ethics of what it means to what it means to represent or write about anything. And I feel like we haven't exhausted in this sense, I don't think we've exhausted why she's so, like, suspicious of the archive itself.. ?Yeah, yeah, like, there's like there's there's there's an ethics here, not just of, like doing the critical factorabulation in which you might, like, sort of appropriate the life of a of a dead person, basically, for your own purposes, but also, there's like anxiety about how you even write about historical injustices that risk like, I think maybe just to say what I'm thinking, like, one of the dangers of the archive is that even by, like, examining the archive or analyzing the archive or writing about the archive, you're reproducing the violence upon which the archive is already founded. So, yeah, I think we're going to talk about that a little more as this conversation involved. That seems like another really important like danger. ?Do people have thoughts about the actual story? She, like, she critically fabulates? Like, why is this the story she critically fabulates? ?And I don't know if she would use it the verb that way, but she engages in critical fabulation. Why the story that Dylan just read on P8? Maybe because all of the facts that she does have of them were from the archives and that she sort of interjects with things like them, Venus could have beheld her dying friend whispered comfort in herocto and promises suit her with soon soon and wished her for a couple and all of that is very, like, it seems as though it's an interjection because that's such an intimate thing that you couldn't possibly have an archive of. ?And so it seems quite intentionally placed that she's put these things in the story which are quite obviously not from the archives and so she's using that to allow the readers to understand how critical fabulation is, perhaps a necessary thing in some cases, so that a story can be better under understood, even though it's quite ethically, like, you know,iculous. Yeah, no, I think that's really interesting point. Like I think that point about just like, the conjured scene is like, is one of such intense intimacy that it couldn't be. ?It couldn't be recorded by like the archad couldn't record it. That seems totally right to me. Is there like a generic. ?Like, I think like I was talking to someone a few years ago about critical fabulation, that this was a faculty member It was like, undergraduates think critical fabulation is like science fictional or something like that there's something that like any work of science fiction is kind of engaged in the work of critical papulation. And this is like, this colleague of mine was like, that's just like a complete misunderstanding of what critical fabulation is. So I'm curious if like there are genres that critical fabulation is more sort of closer to or like whether it. ?Yeah, I mean, another way of putting this is like she calls this a romance and I'm like, why, why would it be described as a romance? And it's confusing cause in paper three, we're talking about romance 2. this week, but it's like a different I think, just to clarify it so I think it's a different kind of romance than what a Hartman's talking about here. A romance and sense of life, as opposed to, like for ethics.. like an an individual focus of a novel like a rom Yeah, exactly. ?But do you think that's the, I think that's not the, I think the romance she's describing, although maybe we can argue about this, like, the romance she's describing is more like what people describing, romance fiction is like. Yeah, well, I mean, this could be just a conversation we have. Like, what does she mean by romance here? ?What she describes it as a romance? Something that's fictional. Definitely not sense an word, general.. ?Yeah, yeah. That seems. I think that seems fundamental. ?Like, I think one of the reasons she calls it a romance is because it's like. she's very aware of the fact that this didn't happen. And that seems important in the context of critical fabulation where the point is not to like fill in the historical record with something that plausibly smooths out or fills in a gap, like smooths out, abundant historical record, or fills in a gap, but something that's like very self-consciously, like, not what happens. So that seems important for why she calls her romance. ?Yeah, I say. I thought that she didn't want it to appear as a romance because she wrote that instead I feared what I might event invent that it would have been a romance and then if we look at it in that way, maybe it can be linked to sort of like Dylan's point about like about like closure and like how like maybe like you're very comfortable with like the genres of like romance, but maybe critical fabulation is like trying to come up with like an account that's not comfortable like because it's sort of like like exists in like maybe like aliminino space. So like the entire point of it is to like sort of like challenge you in a way that maybe like romance and like the closure that it gives doesn't really give you. ?But the picture them, the relics of two Girls, I felt like it's quite romantic in terms of love. So I'm not really sure. Yeah. ?And I can still other question that we should raise this Is this even an example of critical fabulation which she provides here? to just make this all extremely confusing. I think you if you Yeah, she fabulates and criticizes it. ?She says it's not a romance and then she, but it is a romance. Yeah. I feel like maybe, because I've Maybe it or maybe it is. ?Maybe it is because the reason that she wrote like I was really confused as to like the idea of Venus and like how she like encapsulates every single like enslaved woman under like the the like emblematic figure of Venus, right? But I feel like the reason why this can be seen as a a critical fabulation is because the two girls in particular she talks about how one of the girl was mentioned in the archive a little bit more than the other girl. So what she's trying to tell is like the relationship between the two that is not spoken about in the archive, that she's just trying to imagine, but that she can speculate based on the facts of like that interview the question and answer interview that is given so I feel like it is critical fabulation in the sense that she is trying to speculate something. ?I'm just not sure whether like it fulfilled like her ideas of like trying to avoid like romance or like closure and that kind of thing. Because when I read it, I do feel like it gives off a very like hopeful kind of like feeling Yeah. Does anybody want to make the case that it's not an example of critical fabulation, just really quickly before your return to. ?I think also the way Isaac just described the whole setup is totally like.. You could say it's modeling the process that critical, fabulation you take, where there is this, like, these document, these court documents, these legal documents that are describing the death of two women on board the ship that are trying to, you know, what is the legal world, the word, like trying to prosecute, I think it's the capital for their death. The captain is ultimately exonerated, so he doesn't get in any trouble, even though it appears as if he is responsible for their deaths. ?And so that's an example of one how like the archive, like the intrinsic violence of the archive is like, she's looking at a document that literally is recording the exoneration of the captain who's responsible, either directly or indirectly for these women's deaths, these girls' deaths. and then it's leading up. And so, yeah, anyway, I just think Isaac did a really good job of explaining how critical fabulation or this moment that she, that Dylan Grant comes up, but does anyone want to argue that it's not critical, fabulation? I think the argument that it's not is, like, simply like the weird way it's narrated. ?If I could have conjured up more than a name in an indictment, if I could have imagined Venus speaking in her own voice, if I could have detailed the small memories vanished from the lunger, then it might have been possible for me to represent the friendship that could have lostomed between two frightened and lonely girls, shipmates, then Venus could have beheld her dying friend, whispered comfort in her ear, rocked her with promises, soothed her with soon soon, and wished for her to return. Picture them the relics of two girls, one cradling the other, plundered innocent, the sailor caught sight of them and later said they were friends, two wordless. Girls found a country in each other's arms, beside the defeat and the terror, there would be this too, the glimpse of beauty, the instant of possibility. ?So, like, there's like a, it starts as like, she's like, if I could do these things. And I mean to read like, you know, re said, one of the things critical fabulation does is like try to give a voice to people without voices. She kind of suggests that in that passage, if I could have imagined Venus speaking in her own voice, that kind of seems like, even though later, she's like, that's not what critical, fabulation is trying to do. ?I guess the point I'm just trying to to say is that, like, this version of critical fabulation starts in this very kind of conditional, like...al, like, subjunctive space of, like, what city of heart and sort of wants to do, and then she kind of just starts doing it, and then she kind of reflexively after the passage is like, the loss of stories sharpens the hunger for them, so it is tempting to fill in the gaps to provide closure where there is none to create a space for mourning where it is prohibited, to fabricate a witness to a death, not much noticed. So she's like stepping away, she's like critically fabulating and then saying, like, almost like the kind of creating an ironic distance from what she did and kind of suggesting that what she was doing was trying to fill these gaps that should be.. So you could say, I feel like, so on the one hand, you could say, yeah, if I had to narrate what's going on here, I would say, like. " she is herself, like, she's like,Sia Hartman here. ?It's proposing a new methodology, almost autobiographically, by describing her own relation to like this book she wrote, she wrote a book that featured the Venus archive and then she feels bad about how she treated this archival moment in that book. And so now she's like imagining herself correcting the problem through an active critical fabulation, but then has to back away from that act of critical fabulation, and it's almost like being self aware of the active critical fabulation is the thing that makes it critical fabulation in the first place. Like, if she just left the romance if she left this sort of romance the way it was, then it would be it would provide false comfort, it would. ?It would like it would be indulging in this temptation to fill in gaps and to provide closure where there is none. But by pointing at them, you don't want to provide closure, where there is none, you kind of keep it all at the call and good. I'm not sure that makes sense. looks like. ?Yeah. Like, what is the difference between just, like, telling straight fiction and population? Because as far as I' can tell, it's basically the same thing. ?It's that they do like critical, like semi ironically, I don't know. It's like,. I don't know. ?I don't find this sense very easy to read. Yeah. How long of just extra stuff running in, like really long listing and I was just like, can you get you going, I'm sorry you know. ?Do people have thoughts about, like Isaac said this too, like the. I mean, we could start reading the very first paragraph, is very confusing. Like, yeah, does anybody want to describe, like, what is going on in the first paragraph, in this incarnation, she appears in the archive of slavery as a dead girl named in illegal indictment against the slave ship, Captain for the murder of two Negro girls. ?But we could have as easily encountered her in a ship's ledger in the tally of debits or in an overseer' journal. Last night, I laid with Dido on the ground, or as an amorous bed fellow with a purse so elastic that it will contain the largest thing any gentleman can present her with in Harris's list of cook Covent Garden ladies, whereas the Paramour in the narrative of a mercenary soldier in Suam, whereas a brothel owner in a travel account of the prostitutes of Barbados. Anyway, why is it starting this way? ?It's not easy. It's definitely confusing. I mean, it's kind of a nar making itself, isn't it, like I mean, it's not like in radio, but I was going to say it basically is starting in the middle. ?And why, like to what end? Like. It's like an emotional h make this care about politics that it'sing. ?But it's also confusing. I would say the confusion outweighs the emotional hook. Is there So what is the non Okay, I definitely appreciate Eve's cynical reading, and I'm always there for the cynical readings of academic work. ?Cynical. How would you describe it? It's suspicious? ?I mean even I don't what she's difficult. Yeah. But like, but isn't, wouldn't you, um, is there a way that the style here is meant to like, is there a defense of the style that redeems it from the difficulty? ?Like.. the purpose is also. Like she's trying to say, like, I'm trying to do this difficult method of criticism, but, I appreciate that it's difficult. And saying that in a difficult way kind of of such disappoint as well. ?I have, like, another thing I want to throw out, like, another kind of, yeah, point or arena where we can talk more about this stuff. I' also if it's not interesting to you, you can throw it away. But, like, we spent during the Joe North week, Joseph Northw, we talked a lot about, like, there are these people called critics and there're people called scholars and like the critics who are writing for a public audience, don't like, and the scholars who are writing just for academics in institutions of higher educations, they hate each other. ?And harm and describes herself as a writer. And so I'm curious how, like, whether we introduce like writer into the mix, what is the like, if we wanted to construct a triangle between critic scholar writer, it feels like to me the beginning here is very writerly. and she's very self conscious about, like, where does she She says, as a writer committed to telling stories, this is on page four, I have endeavored to represent the lives of the nameless and the forgotten to reckon with loss and to respect the limits of what cannot be known. So, like, how, yeah, how would we understand the word writer in relationship to critic and scholar? ?Yeah, Dylan. I mean, criticism in the scholarship of both kind of precipices of reading and when you write that's kind of like the other end of like you can see it as a process or you can just see it as two sings that think. Yeah, okay, that's interesting. ?They have to explain that process of reading through their words, but it's from the message differently. So it describes like a more productive, potentially relationship to.. Production and consumption. ?Yeah. Yeah, other effects of like her describing herself as a writer and not as a critic or a scholar, or a theorist, like, there could be another word you would throw in here. Yeah, you should. ?I mean, also as she calls herself it's sort of like a precursor telling us that she's going to critically fabulate so to speak, because if she called herself a crit or follow that would mean that she's solely going to analyze or look at the texts that are already at hand whereas, as right to your sort of condemning yourself to add more to your story so she's kind of like putting her footfold in saying, I'm going to critically fabulous and this is a thing that people should be doing, perhaps, or that do you know, yeah. Yeah, no, I think that's totally right. Totally right. ?Yeah, Isaac. I mean like, like, the way we can see also is like, when we are talking about science, we talk about how like scientific, like writers like write in the style of like a certain way in order to appeal to like audiences of that time. So maybe the reason why Hartman is writing and calls herself a writer is because I feel like critical fabulation is not really like a critical theory in a sense. ?It's more of like a way to like reproduce narratives and like experiences. So I feel like she's separating herself from, like scholarship and like critical theory in a sense because she is creating or like fashioning stories rather than like analyzing them just like in a different and more like like careful way. Yeah. ?It's Yeah, yeah, go. Oh, I's just going disagree with the fact that she's separating herself. I mean, like I agree with the general point, but I think she's arguing that both, like, fiction writers and the writers of history and like, critics and scholars are all like they've all got the common denominator that they are kind of fabulating in some way, and she wants to, like, present a process that combines the processes of consert evulation and griticism. ?Yeah. Imigating. Yeah, yeah. ?And so like, and so I and this seems consistent with Ayesha's point, or like, I think it's right that one of the points of critical fabulation is why it's not just purely making up stories is that one, it needs to have a kind of, I say that's not trying to be confusing, but you have to have some, like, scholarly engagement with an arch. Like, you need to engage with the archive. before you can critically fabulate. Like, you need to have, like, if we track how, like, this act of critical fabulation took place, it, like, began with her doing research in an archive. ?Yeah. kind of obvious that is to something to a story and therefore that storyt Yes. Yeah. And also that would you'd be writing. ?Yeah, totally. And that would also explain the emphasis on like critical fabulation and not just like fabulation, like critical suggests like a relationship to something that is already there in existing. The other way is like this kind of intense self-consciousness in which, and as I've described it earlier, is like restraint, this like sense of one's own like, all the bad things you can do, telling stories or writing about history. ?I forget why I'm rehearsing all this, but I guess the point is, this was just to like kind of a firm parts of D's argument, which is that, like, there's something all of these people, something that all of these figures share critic scholars, writers, I want to hold off on theorists, because that's actually the most interesting one to me, is they're all sort of engaging in fact that the work of fabulation. It seems to me just that the critical, that the writer or the critical fabulist writer is it's like aware in a way that the scholar and critic isn't that what they're doing is fictional in some meaningful way. Whereas the critic and scholar thinks of themselves as just doing this kind of scientific, positivist work that is not fictional. ?But the writer knows that it is that it's all fictional. The question to me is, like, how the theorist fits into all of like, because to me, like, I think, like, one way of reading what's going on and why it's difficult is just that Hartman is operating in a theoretical tradition, which is like, where the writing is very hard, and the difficulty of theory is like.. Like, have you guys been made to read theory like, like, in this class, we're not even reading very much, like, really hard theory, like Drida or Roland like Roland Bge or like these people. like Isaac read some of that stuff. ?Like that, like, there's a critical, there's like a theoretical idiom and Fuco, I guess you could, although Fuco, I feel like it is kind of charismatic in a way those other people aren't necessarily, but they're very hard in the kind of the rigor of theory announces itself as like being extremely difficult and challenging. So, like, anyway, I don't know if I like Isaac was like, it's just like, it's distinct from theory, and I'm not sure I'm, like, so confident and distinguishing what she's doing from like the theoretical tradition. Or like, do you feel like I'm misrepresenting what you were saying, or.. ?I don't know. I feel like she just writes the same way as. I'm a bit more familiar with 6O 6O, whatever her name is. ?So like the way that they write is similar, like the way that they write reflects the theory that they are trying to like capture, which I feel like, which is why she's so like so like ambiguous in her entire like writing here. And I feel like both of them are similar in the fact that both of their theories don't want to encode themselves in a definition. Like they restrict like, like a proper, like proper characteristics to their work. ?Yeah. So I guess that's why it was so hard, but I don't know, I just think it's confusing. Yeah, to like grapple with it. ?Totally. Um, totally. Maybe just like a few more questions about critical fabulation. ?Sorry, I have to check my sick child. I want to make sure I gotten messages from my daycare, and I want to make sure my child's not sick. Okay, yes, that's fine. ?So a couple more questions about critical fabulation, and then we're going to turn to this passage from Frederick Douglas, at narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglas, which I sent around right before class, moments before class. I guess one question is why is critical fabulation, like, story, like, take Why does it take the form of like, narrative in a story and not like, poetry or, like, a different literary genre? does it have to. ?She's very, I think she's very invested in narrative as, like, the mode, critical fabulation takes. I'm also looking for my passengers about it, so if nobody leaps about. Okay. ?So on page, the bottom of page 11, like on pages 11 and 12. she writes, by playing with and rearranging the basic elements of the story, by representing the sequence of events in divergent stories from contested points of view, I've attempted to jeopardize the status of the event, to displace the received or authorized account, and to imagine what might have happened or might have been said or might have been done by throwing into crisis what happened when, and by exploiting the transparency of sources as fictions of history, I wanted to make visible the production of disposable lives in the Atlantic slave trade, and as well in the discipline of history, to describe the resistance of the object, if only by first, imagining it to listen for the mutters and oaths and cries of the commodity, by flattening the levels of narrative discourse and confusing n narrators and speakers, I hope to illuminate the contested character of history narrative event. In fact, to topple the hierarchy of discourse into a gulf authorized speech in the clash of voices, the outcome of this method is a recombinative narrative, which loops strands of incommensurate accounts and which weaves present, past, and future in retelling this girl's story and narrating the time of slavery as her own present. Does anyone want to try to summarize like explain that in simpler language? ?Yeah, Dylan. I mean, I don't know if it's kind of explaining some a language, but is it sort of like the way that the not all kind of constructon different by voices, and it's kind of kind of heterolossia all people without a particular hierarchy between normal source and all of the rest, so she sees it the more inherently equal form of storytelling. I was supposed to like, how to feel plays, I guess. ?Yeah, I guess I'm not. I'm trying to like, I'm sort of it's to answer that question, sort of comes down to how you understand the part where. She says, listenen for the mutters and oaths and cries of the commodity, or like, when she's when she talks about describing the resistance of the object by by first imagining it, and then listening for these other, like, that to be sort of gets us into the realm of what Dylan just called heteroglia, which is like a theory of the novel before by Mikail Bachine, for those who are interested in it. ?And I feel like you could maybe see something like that going on in that sentence.. It also, like, yeah, I mean, these are hard sentences. It's like, and they're not necessarily sane. ?They're sort of like enumerating a lot of different things that could be going on or like that she's trying to do with narrative. So like one of those things is to like, um, make visible the production of disposable lives, describe the resistance of the object through this like kind of bringing in more voices and more voices that are like muttering and voicing oaths and cries crying out. By like, it seems like the next one she list is like rearranging for what she calls flattening the levels of narrative discourse between like narrators and speakers, and therefore demonstrating that history itself is kind of in cris or what is a contested terrain. ?Oh, yeah, I guess Clashes of voices also to Dylan's point about heteroglossia. I think the point to me, though, that is like, I know all these things are, it's not like this last point I'm landing on is the most important or whatever, but she does come back to this idea that like, one of the things that's important about narrative is it's staging a relationship between past, president, and future. And so, like, later on page 13, she says, "My effort to reconstruct the past is as well and attempt to describe obliquely the forms of violence, licensed in the present, that is, the forms of death, unleashed in the name of freedom, security, civilization, and God, the good. ?Narrative is central to this effort because of the relation it poses explicit or implied between past presence and futures, wrestling with the girl's claim on the present is a way of naming our time, thinking our present, and envisioning the past, which has created it. So anyway, narrative becomes a way of, like, understanding the relationship between the past, the present, and the future. And so, anyway, maybe one last last question. ?I just this is a question that I feel like we basically addressed so we can well, I mostly just want to repeat it so we all sort of internalize it, which is there's I would say, like, so one the most striking formal thing about this writing to me in all of its difficulty is that Hartman uses a ton of questions, like rhetorically, this essay is organized around the question, like on page three. How can narrative and body life in words and at the same time respect what we cannot know, how does one listen for the groans and cries the undecipherable songs, the crackle of fire, and the cane fields, the lanterns for the dead and shouts of victory and then assigned words to all of it. Anyway, there's like a list of questions. ?Any page you go to, I feel like you're going to confront a list of questions. And so I'm curious why there are those questions. Yeah, let's start with that question. ?Why are there? Why is the questions such a like like, why is that the dominant sort of rhetorical mode of this essay? Yeah, I should. ?That's the foundation of criticalations, is that there are questions that have been uned. So in order to attempt to answer the kind of acknowledge that the gaps are there fast. Yeah. ?And acknowledge that perhaps in an attempt to fill those gaps, you might also be missing things. Or you''re not trying to fill theital. You're just trying to propose something that might fill them. ?Totally. Totally. Yeah, so that seems totally absolutely right to me. ?Like, there's a kind of tentativeness or like, that tentativeness comes out of like this kind of critical relationship to one's own practice, basically. The motivated by, like, this anxiety that you're gonna fill in a gap. in a way that's kind of misleading or just or just produces a distortion or that's unethical.. And to me, the question, it also is like, I think that tentativeness is also born of Hartmann's own, very kind of like ref like self consciousness. ?Like she's very self critical in the essay, like, the fact that this act of critical fabulation comes out of this, like, dissatisfaction with the sentence she wrote in one of her earlier books is like models that kind of like, I think this like restlessness with our own writing that I think we're supposed to. She's like, telling us we should have. So, like, yeah, Anyway, so I think the question is baked did to that. ?And similar, and I think along the similar lines, there's a big emphasis on like imposs, like that there's like there's something impossible about critical fabulation, like one of the section headings is titled A History of Failure, an in part that's trying to like indicate that, like, critical fabulation is always sort of caught up. It's like always incomplete as a project and is always sort of like failing as a project, because there's this sense that like if it were complete, there'd be something bad or something like ethically suspect about that... Let's turn to a narrative of the autobiography of Frederick Douglas. ?I would have printed this off, but it was like, right before clad, and that's also why I don't have I have to look on my computer this whole time because I was writing like to class and the printer was out of a paper, very frustrating. Okay, I'm just pulling it up on my computer. So this excerpt for Eve and Dylan is at the end of the first chapter of narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglas. ?I don't think we actually talked about it on the day we talked about this book. Maybe we mentioned it a little bit in paper three. And so this is a moment where Frederick Douglas narrates himself coming into consciousness as a kind of enslaved person by watching his aunt, be whipped by the master, by their master. ?And I'll just read this part. I'll read a lot of it out loud. And the question is like, what would City of Hartman have to say about this passage? ?And I actually didn't I don't think this. We can talk about whether we're meant to do acts of critical fabulation with this passage, but I almost didn't like critical fabulation is like only one thing we can talk about in reference to this passage. Okay. ?It required extraordinary barbarity on the part of an overseer to affect master. He was a cruel man, hardened a long life of slaveholding, he would have times seemed to take great pleasure in whipping a slave. I've often been awakened at the dawn of the dawn of day by the most heartrending shrieks of an own aunt of mine, whom we used to tie up to a joist and whip upon her naked back till she was literally covered with blood. ?No words, no tears, no prayers from his gory victim seemed to move his iron heart from its bloody purpose. The latter she screamed, the harder he whipped, and where the blood ran fastest, there he whipped longest, he would whip her to make her scream and whip her to make her hush. And not until over by fatig would he cease to swing the blood cloted cow skin. ?I remember the first time I ever witnessed this horrible exhibition. I was quite a child, but I well remember it. I never shall forget it whilst I remember anything. ?I was the first of a long series. It was the first of a long series of such outrages, of which I was doomed to be a witness and a participant. It struck me with. ?Sorry with awful force. It was the bloodstained gate. the end entrance to a hell of slavery, over which I was about to pass. It was some of those terrible spectacle. ?I wish I could commit to paper the feelings with which I beheld it. This occurrence took place very soon after I went to live with my own master and under the following circumstances on Hester when I out one night, where, for what I do not know, and happened to be absent when my master desired her presence. He had ordered her not to go out evenings and warned her that she must never let him catch her in company with a young man who was paying attention to her belonging to Colonel Lloyd belonging to Colonel Lloyd. ?The young man's name was Ned Roberts, Generally Cald Lloyd's Ned. Ymaster was so careful of her may be safely left to conjecture. She was a woman of noble form and of graceful proportions, having very few equals, and fewer superiors in personal appearance among the colored or white women of our neighborhood. ?Maybe I'll just stop there. Let's take like a few minutes on our own and just like write down some ideas of like what you think Hartman would say about what Hartman would do with this passage. Uh, we're, um thinking about how, what city Hartartment would do with the Frederick Douglass passage that I emailed to everybody in the classroom before our class started. ?Okay. Let's rejoin the big room. What would Hartman do with the scene in Douglas's narrative? ?Yeah. Isaac, just a cat clap for you. Yeah. ?He says in the narrative, I wish I could commit to pay for the feelings with which I beheld it. So I think she was sort of acknowledged the fact that there have been things deliberately emitted from this text and she would also be acknowledging the fact that the narrative has been taught from the first person and so that the details included are being carefully chosen rather than being fabricated for the purposes of fabation, like with the archives, it was coming from a perspective, which is quite obviously, by, where and it's two fabricate a narrative which is favorable for one person, whereas the narrative of Frederick Douglas is not to create a biased or favorable narrative in anyone's case, it's just to report what happened and whether that means that someone comes off worse or better is up to the reader's interpretation. And so I guess she would just acknowledge that where things have been omitted, that it's deliberate and that silence can also speak volumes in the same way that words can. ?So like, what Dylan said about heteroglossy, I feel like silence is a distorted version of that in this case.. Yeah, that's no, that's really interesting. Like, so there's I think the global point here is like, the archive, if we like if we treat narrative of the life of Frederick Douglas as not like, outside the archive of the historical record, but actually like part of the historical record that there're ways in which it still is distorted, and we can see that distortion in this like, his point, which I think that sentence is so interesting that he's like, basically. ?Acknowledging that it can't be.. It can't lead. There's something about it that can't leave a historical trace, at least not in writing. ?Yeah, that's really interesting and important. Yeah, I. I think Chicago was himself over it kind of he wouldn't call it a population, but he kind of is conscious of the national process which he's committing himself to, and he kind of he says, why Master was so careful of may be so conjecture. So I think a lot of his admissions are quite soberate and he forms part of the historical record, but he also comments on the historical records, even if it's generate is part of history and the slightly the way. ?Yeah, yeah. And the people remember, if people who are in paper three remember this point, like, Douglas writes another autobiography in the 1850s, where he basically explains that, like, his first autobiography was like he wasn't in total control of it because he was basically like, under the control or like the regiment of this antiabolitionist movement, led by Willie Lloyd Garrison, which like, prevented him from, like, having complete ownership over even his writing here. So that's just to say that you can even see within the first, like the first version of the Autobiography, how contcious he is of the politics of language and writing, that seems right to me. any other, initial thoughts about how Hartman would read this this moment that we have in, like, touched on yet Yeah, Dylan? ?I mean, there's also the potential that Hpand could use this document as historical records to crysticallyabate herself un like kind of attempts to imagine the art, but I don't think she would actually imagine that she would just kind of play with different ideas of what the person, the answer to the being was still trying to like perspect sexality. Yeah, that's really interesting. There's There's something sadistic about why I picked this passage, which is that it's at the center of like, this this, I don't know if it rises to the level of controversy, but like this dispute within black studies about what to do with it. ?And if you go to Venus and 2 Acts, the essay itself, you can see the glimpse you can get a glimpse of this dispute. This is on page four. Again, she's in the kind of question, though this is like, towards the end of the page, she references this scene. ?She says, how does one revisit the scene of subjection without replicating the grammar of violence? Is the terrible beauty that resides in such a scene, something akin to remedy, as Fred Moten would seem to suggest, the kind of terrible beauty and terrible music that he discerns in Aunt Hester's screams, transformed into the songs of the great house Farm. We' in the photograph of Ed Till's destroyed face, and the acuity of regard, which arises from a willingness to look into the open casket, to the possibilities and outweighing the dangers of looking again, and to just sort of like, you know, provide my own gloss of these sentences that I hope will help like kind of clarify them, the scholar, Fred Moten, who's like, I would say, like Hartman and Fred Mon, or maybe the two most influential scholars working in, Black Studies, like for Fred Mon. ?I tried to like gesture towards this like reading or interpretation of the scene in our class, in paper three when we talked about narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglas were for Fred Moten, like the scene with Aunt Hester, is this like moment of origination where Frederick Douglas comes to understand himself, and what it means to be enslaved, and that, like, the scream gets sort of translated into the sorrow songs that Douglas also likes, and that later, WWBD Boyz likes. and that it's like through this scream that you have like, basically that originates the radical black tradition is what Motin is arguing. And Sidia Hartman is actually like the scene is like, poses serious dangers, and like the last sentence she says, "Dude, the possibilities of reading the scene or looking at the scene outweigh the dangers of looking again. And the question is the question is like, what are the dangers that city of Hartman perceives in in like reading and rereading this scene?. ?I sort of interesting how both kind of sl master Douglas himself, I had voices or their speech, kind of director on or really have any of that. She just kind of has the screaming up for data. Yeah. ?Yeah, definitely. And people, scholars have made the point that, like, the black radical tradition that Fred Modin is describing is, like, often, like a masculine tradition that, like, wants to disavow this kind of maternal or female presence, that kind of that they will acknowledge gives it birth, but also they want to, like, repress and disavow it, so that can definitely be part of what is at stake in Hartman's, like, reference to like the dangers of looking again. Yeah, Isaac. ?Maybe you like, he's also Hartman might also be talking about like the dangers of reproduction of like the experience and how like it reproduces violence, like the way that Douglas writes his narrative, it's as if like he's forcing like unhesered to like experience the exact same thing again, and even like the way that he describes her voice, your life, like, like recreating the entire violence again. So I think she says it like the in like the next page, like the next paragraph, why subject the date to new dangers and to a second order of violence, which I think is why she talks about like the twoX, like the first act and then like the second act, which is the reproduction of. Yeah, totally. ?And there's also like, this is one of the dangers of critical fabulation that I going to be able to find this code really fast. I mean, there's definitely so, like, there's a danger of sort of like repeating the violence. Like, there's basically a danger that every time you return to these scenes, you sort of reproduce and and yeah, like you reproduce the violence that is at the origin of the scene itself. ?And so on page 14, she even says that her own account as my account replicates the very order of violence that it writes against by placing yet another demand upon the girl, by requiring that her life be made useful or instructive, by finding in it a lesson for our future, or a hope for history, we all know better. And then, like, so this is why did my decision to like introduce Frederick Doug? This is like doubly sadistic, because it's not only does it come up in the article itself, but also in Hartman's, I think this was her first book called Scenes of Subjection, Famously of Opens with her, not right? ?Of course, she says, like, " I'm not gonna reproduce this account, this, like, scene." She says, " I'm just gonna read the passage really quickly. This is the second paragraph of scenes of subjection. ?She says, "I have chosen not to reproduce Douglas's account of the beating of Aunt Hester in order to call attention to the ease with which such scenes are usually reiterated, the casualness with which they are circulated, and the consequences of this routine display of the slave's ravaged body, rather than inciting indignation, too often they amure us to pain by virtue of their familiarity, the off peated or restored character of these accounts, and our distance from them are signaled by the theatrical language usually resorted to in describing these instances, and especially because they reinforce the spectacular character of black suffering. What interests me are the ways we are called upon to participate in such scenes. Are we witnesses who confirm the truth of what happened in the face of the world destroying capacities of pain, the distortions of torture, at the sheer unrepresentability of terror, and the repression of dominant accounts. ?Or are we voyeers fascinated by it and repelled by exhibitions of terror and suffering? What does the exposure of the violated body yield? Proof of black sentience, or the inhumanity of the peculiar institution? ?Or does the pain of the other merely provide us with the opportunity for self reflection at issue here is the precariousness of empathy and the uncertain line between witness and spectator., I can't read that only more obscene than the brutal brutality unleashed at the whipping post is the demand that the suffering be materialized and evidenced by the display of the tortured body. or endless recitations of the ghastling and the terrible. Anyway, I guess I'm just all this is just a way to say, Hartman, I think one of the, I think one thing to take away from this is both so like, the two things I would take away from Venus and 2XR, like, one, this, like, concept of critical fabulation, which I feel like we've done a really good job describing. And then other, like, the sort of the ethics of dealing with the archive and the ways in which archive reproduce like reproduce the kind of logic of the violence that produce them. ?So it's both in the case that Dylan said earlier, like, archives are made by the kind of winners of history. And so therefore they're misleading and distort the historical record. But it's also just the fact that even by engaging these archives, and even in engaging critically with these archives, we risk, like reproducing the dynamics that originated them. ?So those would be my two big takeaways. I want to spend, like, the last eight or so minutes just talking about questions everybody has about the exam or anxieties people have about, like, the prompts I circulated, if that would be. Because I find the proms kind of scaring myself. ?If we want to talk about them at all before next week. Yeah. I just have an issue with how my meant to insert into, like, what you've provided. ?I mean, like, I have an idea of how I can insert one into them, but from what I've been hearing, some people are using more than one and I don't quite understand, for example, how someone might insert like a new historicist. something. When you have no context knowledge and you're just being given that. Yeah. ?So I think the first thing I'll say is that you, if you don't need to insert with that, like, okay. Let's step all the way back. YMC. ?I know, a lot of families targeted at Isaac, I think. The, I think the first thing I'll say is that even even thinking about these prompts through the frame of like, I have to get, I need a theory here to explain it, or like, to address it, or like, I need to mobilize a theory. It's maybe the wrong way of approaching the prompt. ?I don't know if that makes sense. Like, I think what's what's hard about these prompts, and I see this, like, the tutorial I say this week as merely just like, an experiment where we're all gaining a lot of self knowledge about how this process works. So you really can't. ?There's no, like, I'm sure everybody will do it wrong, and I'm sure I'm thinking about it in the wrong terms, but there are no stakes to it. Like, I like, I think it's just like, we're sort of puzzling our way through how this exam works for paper 1B. So that's the first thing I'll say. But so just to explain what I think, I think you're supposed to approach these prompts is that the prompts basically are almost like riddles that, like, are asking a question that themselves sort of embed questions about particular methods within them. ?Let me if if I can just pull up an exam from a previous year where I can illustrate this more without like kind of quote ruining one of the ones I've already circulated. But yet we shouldn't be thinking about it in terms of being able to insert or discuss a theory immediately when we read it. I think you can discuss a theory or even mult multiple theories in your answers, but I think you wouldn't just like, yeah, I'm trying to think it kind of depends on what you mean by like using the theory. ?You wouldn't have to explicitly name a theory, demonstrate that theoristical method and then you gone. Yeah, yeah. Like, I would say I would even say think more in terms of like, you're going to mobilize a particular thinker or scholar that we are theorists that we've encountered rather than'cause you might be, like invoking a theory that the person reading you has like a different sense of what that theory is. ?Yeah. So just say like, like, so I sent this in one of the tutorials this week. Like when they say discuss, I think often what they're looking for is like you two say, like, I just wish I had a really good example I could just summon and I should have just come prepared to do that. ?And maybe during tutorials next week, I will... Sorry, I'm just trying to find. I think you just like just write. ?Yeah, just write.. It's no big deal. Like, don't need to take so much. to take risks. ?Yes, yes, take risks and write. I mean, that is what I'm telling you. Those are.. risks, but also echo what the people. ?Yeah, so I think for this essay, yeah, I mean, yeah, I think for this essay, what you're meant to do is like, okay, here's a question. This is a quote from an Eandati Roy from the novel, the God of Small Things. They were made to write, inn future, we will not read backwards, in future, we will not read backwards, 100 times for I mean, it's a hard c to understand. ?When I read it at lab. But the point of the quote is, it's taking a sentence from a post colonial novel and saying, "D discuss this quote." And I think what they want you to do with that quote is to take, like a postcolonial theorist and say, like, "Here is this how this here is Edward Said's theory of chorealism. ?Here's what he's what that argument's here's that theory. Here is, you know, I'm going to provide an extensive account of that theory. And now I'm going to explain how that theory illuminates this sentence from this novel. ?Wait, could you say the first bit again, please? So like, I mean, on some level, this example is even more is like unhelpful just because I think it's actually so obvious how it would work, how you would respond to it. So it's basically the prompt is, here's a quote from this post colonial notf. discuss. ?And I think in that discussion, you're supposed to take a theory of take a kind of post colonial theorist. Like, I think it wouldn't make sense to be like, I'm gonna read this sentence through, like, form, I'm gonna use formalism to understand this this passage, because I actually don't think that's what they're looking for. I think they want you to use a postcolonial scholar. ?Yeah, you should. Also, is colon, I completely may have missed them off, but I was just talking to another English today. Is formalism what we did in the close reading week? ?Not exactly. But this is like in, I mean, we can have a conversation about formalism. in structuralism, which are very similar., endeavors, but not identical endeavors. And they're similar to close reading, but they're not identical to close reading. ?That's not a helpful answer. And I think the thing to tell yourself is, one, you could like, you know, read more about these things in in in the extra readings that I suggested everybody reads. Two, you don't like, as I tried to say before, they're like usually 12 prompts and at least, you know, two or three, I think will fall within the ambit of what we've been talking about this term. ?But then many of them will just be like on theories, like formalism that we haven't talked about, and you just don't need to write about it. You don't understand. But yeah, Amy, you had your hand on that right now. to agree with the question and also when it says about the strong like. ?No, like the way I was describing it in one of the tutorials, and I forget which one was like, I think they say discuss because they're like, like one version of that, the example that I've been trotting out is like, this post colonial theorist would read it, this line like this. This other one would read it in different terms like this. And then I think you could just have like a week sort of like, I, like, I find the second one more compelling. ?And that's why I'm, like, reluctant with, like with Ayisho, Aisha's, like, recalling what I said during tutorial this week that I want the tutorial S is to be like more daring and interesting, which I do. But I think for the purposes of the 1B exam, you're mostly being evaluated on your fluency with particular theories. And so you're like, I don't think they want you to produce an interesting reading of Sid Hartman. ?I think they want you to just show you understand Cia Hartmann's argument, and you can mobilize it. in this setting.. Bria, you had a question. Thank you. ?I was just gonna say, in this week she said, should welect someone that we've like looked at in the San might as well can it be someone that we've research You can do anything you want. Yeah, there's no limitation. Don't need to do what we've been doing this term at all. ?I' stress, don't stress. I't one that I said already. I haven't yet. ?Okay. You've always going to ask about wrong. So, like, the thing is, and I explain this, though the even Dylan, you're responding to the, like, what I asked you to do. ?Yeah, which is not identical to what the exam is asking you to do. Yeah, yeah. the back from addiction, like, like the first one on the third. I was like hit the third one and that's from the poem, would you and recommend L in the rest of the poem? ?Yeah. I think you could if it helps you. I haven't read this poem, so I should look at the rest of it. ?But we meant to know No, no, no. This is the one is a tape. This is a tape home exam. ?So we couldn't research on a thing about. This the same sense of that. Okay, yeah. ?Okay, that makes a lot more sense. Does that make it easier? Yeah, my friends been lying to name Yeah, whatever, okay. ?Yeah. I get it. Yeah. 750 words is quite a lot for just applying one specific theory. ?So if we were to bring in another theorist because we were only like too many words. Yeah, I mean, do all I'm going to say is do, however, you would like, and we'll talk about the results in tutorial. Thank you all. ?Hey. No more one B meetings in seminar. That's an accomplishment for a sol. ?Ooh. Should I be at doing the third tutorial or It's really depends on your own. That's right. ?Iorrow, if you want to do another one., we'll.'s quite a lot. Yeah, yeah.. German haven't been too..., I waiting from the dark house. ?I.. I called. What is it, later? ?I's. I almost cried like, come on, Middle tables, one pound.. You have so much aurora. ?When you start toing, everyone you start