being like, well, it could be this, it could be like one of three genres. Like, that's basically how lots of people's essays turned out this week, and I feel like the outline structure of this assignment made it very start. people are like, well, it's sort of like a romantic novel, like this is R's but then it's sort of like this other genre, and it's sort of like this other genre. And I feel like confining it to those three is that actually, like, there's a much longer kind of set of genericric, like coordinates that I feel like it's embedded. ?So I just thought you would take a minute and like, enumerate some more of them. So what if we said? We said, a ventronaut, we said, romance, yeah, what are are the other ones that I feel like we can point to, that it's like engaged with. ?Okay, trash. You know, tragedy, definitely. He read a lot of Shakespeare before he read this. ?Inside K. Like an encyclopedia. Yeah, yeah, you going to say. I was just going to say old philosical problems. ?Yeah, and like, Isaac course of like these asides, like kind of a philosophical treatise almost he's doing. Yeah, and At some point, maybe like biblical, like, yeah. Like a bibical parallel not that's the genre I was thinking like the father maples reading shona. ?You could have had a do you could like read the book the way Father Mapple is reading Jonah. and the other ones that come to my you check off my many of the ones by that I haven't mind that there are a couple more. So, like one I'll mention is like the Grail Quest, and this is one way of connecting like romances a genre to a longer tradition that like begins in the sort of like medieval period in a kind of courtly or aristocratic culture. and then in some ways, I feel like the most interesting, that we're not even gonna discuss that much today, because there's just like, we have comically, little amount of time to discuss this this book is the industrial N. so it's one thing, if they're like a few things about this book that I think are really hard to sort of b them from our current historical moment, but one thing that's hard to fath them is just that in the United States, in the mid 19th century, like fossil fuel production is just like not very, there's like oil, like actual real oil doesn't really become a thing until like the 1860s, 1870s, so when Melville's writing, it's like people are actually getting, like candles made out of whale, oil, and whale oil is like a source of energy. So like, one very kind of like influential way of reading Moby Dick is as like, we could read it alongside north and south as like a story of like this is sort of CLR James' reading that I suggested as like, oh, we actually see here is like a group of workers coming together, like industrial laborers on board the whale ship. and their relationship too. ?And like, you know, there's all that stuff about how many lays everybody gets and how like wages are distributed. So you can read it, you could read the book very and very interesting and productive ways in those terms. Yeah, so anyway, those are like there are a lot of genres that's connected to. ?I feel like I feel like we're just, we need to sort of like explain some of the stakes of why he has, why there is this kind of restless relationship to genre. Like, why is like, and I think Jade and Isaac may, like, were working towards in your outlines, some of this like largerger point about like why the book feels like it's kind of both like using a lot of these dramres, but also like rejecting a lot of these genres. So I guess like, I want to talk about that. ?Like, why, why reject genre? Like, what is so bad or inhibiting or stultifying about genre that Moby Dick has to, like, not follow any one of them? I think the book itself is it's very. ?It doesn't Melville was Presbyterian, but he's very open to like other people's way of life, other people's ways over. And I think he he shows off a lot, like a variety of ways of thinking here, especially through the like the variety of people that are on the ship and also the different way he writes just to show that he's against dogware in general. I think, yeah.. ?Yeah, and I'll just quote something to sort of back up this reading so this is like when Ishmael's like talking about converting Queequeg at the end of chapter 10 This is like three paragraphs from the bottom of chapter 10. He then, what about is he being prayers? He's describing the, took out his idol and removed the paper fire brand by certain signs and symptoms. ?I thought he seemed anxious for me to join him, but well knowing what was to follow, I deliberated a moment, in case he invited me, I would comply or otherwise. I was a good Christian, born and bred in the bosom of the infallible Presbyterian church. How could I unite with this wild idol in worshiping this piece of wood? ?But what is worship, thought I? Do you suppose now, Ishmael, that the magnanimous god of heaven and earth, pagans on all included, can possibly be jealous of an insignificant bit of blackwood? Impossible. ?But what is worship to do the will of God, that is worship, and what is the will of God, to do to my fellow man, when I would have my fellow man do to me, that is the will of God. Now, Quequake is my fellow man, and what do I wish that this Quequeg would do to me? Why unite with me in my particular Presbyterian form of worship? ?Consequently, I must then unite with him and his ergo, I must turn Idoliver. So I kindled the shavings, helped propped up the innocent little idol, offered him burnt biscuit with Queequeg, salamed before his before him twice or thrice, kissed his nose, and that dog would be undressed and went to bed at peace with our own consciences and all the world. So, yeah. ?Anyway, just an example of how Ishmael certainly is represented as a kind of ecumetical guy against, like, and I think dogma, I think this is your suggestion, Jay, J like, I think the figure of dogma maybe in the book is like, Ahab, who's like monomaniacal and like obsessed with like one thing. Yeah, Isaac, do you want to talk a little bit about what you, what you think about or what you proposed in your essay or your fake essay about genre. There was a letter there Melvie wrote towards. ?I don't know one of his friends while writing the novel and then he said like he's I don't have to quote, but basically he was he said that he wanted to try his best to give the truth of the thing I didn't really touch as to what the thing was. I really focused on like his aim to give the truth so my argument was that the like constant shifting of dramas is basically like just a way to showcase the different ways of exploring the quest for truth and then I felt like linking it to like the romantic novel about like like the quest and like how like like basically the the point is the journey, not like the end like that quest for truth is meaningful even if the truth is never attained so in the same way like how like the hunt for Mobidik was meaningful to Ishmail even if they never really like caught Mobidik or like understood what Mobidek was despite all of like the scientific like interruptions to try and understand like Mobidic yeah. So the these are kind of just different ways of getting at some deeper underlying truth, but that ultimately the novel, your reading would be that ultimately the novel's sort of agnostic about which whether any of these is the right one. ?Yeah, I don't think Melvin truly like pushes for any one argument yeah that I recall if not, I will I would feel like like I feel like pushed towards one certain Yeah. Yeah, J. Yeah, I was kind of talking about this in my last paragraph It like when you said seeking for the sake of seeking. ?If I, like, especially for his act of classification in the scientific attractters He's not doing it for the act for finding out classifications yet. He's just doing it as a testiment of, oh, this is what humans do in order to find meaning and truth in their lives. So he's not classifying the whales as in order to find, I't know if this makes sense, he's doing it for the active classification itself. ?He's not doing it for on, like unintent purpose. I just added up one line here in my aspl about like the futility as well as like the necessity of ordering the world so like I feel like she points at like the inability to like capture meaning and true, but nevertheless like still like pushes for like the audio of like like trying to capture truth. Yeah, so like this is maybe this is a quote that I think is at least in Isaac's paper. ?This isn't a Cetology chapter chapter 32 This is when when Asel's first setting out to do his classifications. It's like, I don't know, it's a few paragraphs into the shephers pretty early on. He says, this is the end of one paragraph. ?As yet, however, the sperm whale scientific or poetic lives not complete in any literature, far above all other hunted whales, his is an unwritten life. Now, the various species of whales need some sort of popular, comprehensive classification, if only an easy outline of one, for the present, hereafter to be filled in all its departments by subsequent laborers. As no better man advances to take this matter in hand, I hereupon offer my own poor endeavors. ?I promise nothing complete because any human thing's supposed to be complete, must for that very reason, infallibly be faulty. I shall not pretend to omit minute in atomical description of the various species, or in this place at least, too much of any description. My object here is simply to project the drought of a systemization of seetology. ?I'm the architect, not the builder, but it is a ponderous task, no ordinary letter sorter in the post office is equal to it. To grow up down into the bottom of the sea after them to have one's hands among the unspeakable foundation's ribs and very pelvis of the world. This is a very fearful thing. ?What am I that I should essay to hook the nose of this Leviathan, the awful tauntings in Job might well appall me. I'm going to skip I'll just it. Will he the Levviathan make the covenant with thee, behold the hope of him is vain, but I' swam through libraries and sailed through oceans. ?I have had to do with these hands, I'm earnest and I will try. There are some preliminaries to settle. I guess like, yeah, I'm I'm just trying to think what I find unsatisfying about the descriptions we're putting forward here. ?I guess like one thing I would find, potentially find unsatisfying is whether Ima like I basically, what I find unsatisfying is how, like unneurotic or how unvexed this description of the books books project is. Like, I think there's one way of describing what Ishmael's doing here is actually being as monomaniacal and as obsessive as a hab himself, that just as Ahab kind of tries to hunt Moby Dick and invests all kind of meaning in the world on Moby Dick, Ishmael has become obsessed with like hunting the whale through these different kind of disciplinary philosophical scientific registers. And I guess like, I mean, yeah, maybe and, yeah, I actually want to go. ?I'm gonna take the conversation in a completely different direction and just actually right now, in a way that I hope will kind of like, yeah, make these stakes clear too. So like just to kind of like reiterate this point that I think seems right to me in some fundamental way, that the book is like, instead of the kind of classic traditional epic of antiquity, your Iliad, your Odyssey, your Aeneids, which sort of kind of, as they're often described, like, have this sort of totalizing view of ancient civilization in the world that they're produced out of, or the sort of like sensibility and meaning and unity of ancient life, like, is expressed everywhere in, like, in every part of an epic poem. Moby Dick, in contrast, is profoundly fractured and showing and it shows all these different ways of trying to reach a truth that can never be sort of like, totally comprehended or rendered. ?And so the book has this sort of fractured appearance where we're trying out a lot of different, like, we're trying to get a lot of different ways to get at the truth, but we can't quite get there. I think that's a kind of fair description of what we've been talking about. I guess I wonder if there's a kind of genre. ?It's like then the genre of the book, the failure of all these other genres to add up to each other. These are like, and I'll describe these as sort of like, they're like sort of what describing, like certain modern forms in their relationship to genre, they are these sort of meta genres where like, like, for instance, we're not going to talk much more about this. like one scholar very famously described Moby Dick as like a modern epic, which is like, like distinguishing it from like the kind of traditional ancient epic where there is this sort of like, totalizing view of the world that there isn't this anxiety about truth being elusive or unfindable, but modern epic is like incomplete and kind of tries to use, yeah, like tries to use like a kind of encyclopedic range of discourses to reach a truth that doesn't exist. So like Ulysses, James H is, Ulysses is in this tradition, you know, I don't know, I think, yeah, like a Swan. ?I think he might say Swan's why I appro Swan's Way is in this tradition. Another one of these sort of meta genres is the novel itself, like the novel is famous when people describe what a novel is, when Pierce that the novel describe what it is, they describe it as this kind of omnivorous form that is constantly like absorbing and appropriating other genres and kind of metabolizing them for its own sort of aesthetic purposes. So, I mean, this is obviously Moby Dick is obviously a good example where it like, takes a sermon and it like incorporates a sermon into it. ?I'm trying to think of like other good examples that might be familiar to you, but I'm like just floundering around right now. I don't like to think I'm an example. Like Don Quixote, it takes like the Don Quixote takes, you know, the stories of chivalry and incorporates them into it, but it does it in this kind of ironic way that it subordinates these other genres to its own project. ?At the same time, like Moby Dick, none of these, the novel itself is this like known for not being aolved or struggling to kind of capture a totality of social experience. The last one I'm going to land on here is like, the romance and I'll have more to say about, like, what the romance is, as a genron, but I guess like.. Yeah, I mean, I guess, like, maybe maybe, I don't think this will be conversationally interesting to talk about, but, like, one sort of dynamic, just gets us back to what we were what I feel like we were discussing before, one sort of dynamic here is like, if you're gonna say Moby Dicks genre is it's a genre is made up of how all these other genres don't work. ?And so then, like, is there kind of like a danger, sorry that this is getting so philosophical, theoretical, is there a danger of like like if Ishmael is worried about any genre, because it would be too dogmatic, I think that's the word shade user originally. Like, it would suggest that there's like one way of going through, like one way of kind of accessing truth or knowing the world. And that's like sort of associated potentially, you can say, I think with like Ahab's extremely like dogmatic view, this sort of like mono maniacal tribe he has to like get Moby Dick. ?Could you say that, like, trying to describe Moby Dick, trying to describe Moby Dick as a genre or the romance, as a genre, as one that encompasses all of like the failure of genre, then that it would seem like you are potentially endangered and falling back into the kind of that dogmatic worldview. I want to come back to all of these things, but let's let's kind of pivot for a moment and talk about, like, what romance is and like what it meant at this moment in the world literering history and like maybe American literary history. And to do that, let's start with the opening page of the book. ?Does somebody want to read the opening rep paragraphs for us?, we going from White Chapel from the Well, that's an interesting question. And maybe we'll come back to that, what the hell these extracts are doing at the beginning of the book, which is a very interesting question, but we're going to start with chat... Ishma, some years ago, how long precisely, having little or no money in my purse and nothing particular to me on. ?I thought I would about a little water parts of the world. It is a way I have of driving off the sple and regulating the circulation whenever I find myself growing grim about the mouth, whenever it is a damn truth in November my soul, whenever I find myself involuntarily pausing warehouses and bringing up the Rio, every funeral I meet, and especially whenever my high hypot? Yeah. get such an upper hand in me, though it requires a strong moral principle to prevent me from deliberately stepping into the street and methodically knocking people's hats off then I account it high time to get to the sea as soon as I can. ?This is my substitute for a kissful and fall with a philosophical flourish, C throws himself upon his sword. I quietly take to the. There is nothing surprising in this. ?If they knew it, almost all men in some time or other cherish very nearly the same feelings towards the ocean with me. There is now your intellicity of the Manhatto's belted brown by wolves as Indian isles by coral reefs. Cus surrounds it with her surf bright left the streets. ?It's extreme downtown is the battery where that noble knoll is washed by waves and cold by breezes, which a few hours previous were out of sight of land look at the crowds of watercers then circum circum. H Circumulate the city of a tree who started. Go from Cor's hook to a Co slip and from dance by Whitehall. ?What do you see? P silent sentinels all around the town stand thousands upon thousands of mortal in the ocean reveries. Some against the sp, some seated upon heads, some looking over the bocks of ships from China, some often the rigging as if striving to get a still a sea peak but these are all landsmen of weekdays pent up in laugh and plaster, tied to count as nures, clin desks. ?How then is this? Are the greenfields gone? What do they hear? ?Okay. Yeah, why are we starting the book this way? What is that? ?What is this opening? Tell us about the like aesthetic Noville's aesthetic project? And we can also talk about like this first sentence is like maybe the most famous first sentence in world literary history and like, why is this sentence so famous? ?I honestly, I think it wasn't until like, I feel like I had some sort of revelation that I'll try to convey to you about the first sentence, but for the longest time I was like, I genuinely don't understand why people think this is such a great first line. But so I feel like we can talk about that too. Yeah, yeah, what we can do to people with theories. ?I think it kind of looks that up everything that we've just been talking about in, like, is so ambiguous, like, you don't know if he real name is if, like, and if it is like, you don't know why he doesn't like to share his real name. It also kind of starts up for the booking framework. I noticed a lot of the characters names that relate to the Bible. ?But I think it mainly kind of answers to that sense of ambiguic. Yeah. Yeah, yeah, that seems right. ?And that's like, yeah, that seems right. Yeah. Other thoughts about the first paragraphs or the first sentence in particular? ?Yeah, for me again more usually kind of sets up the quest obviously I's. He's he's alone in the wildness, searching for something that he'll never finds in the end. So he just kind of sets up the vi of that from the first momentment. yeah, yeah, I do have theories. ?I wrote like, in my hand that there's a sense of like action that he calls to the reader, like call me Ishmael, but I couldn't figure out why he does that. But yeah, the same with the outcast wanderer, then the first three like paragraphs like gives like creates a sense of like restlessness and like a needful quest yeah, but for the first three lines, every baby I've read since it's like amazing, but IL Yeah. Yeah, I guess like, we can blood dwell in it like a little bit longer, like, because I think you could say there are all sorts of ways to start a story ambiguously. ?They're all sorts of ways you can like contra this kind of biblical parable, like, I feel like I wrote down, like, like another version, I mean, like, they're all sorts of variations you can imagine to this first sentence that would basically do the things you're describing, like. It could start, you can call me Ishmael or my name is Ishmael or I feel like the same ambiguity would be preserved in the same sort of like religious sort of allegory would be preserved. And it's something, like, I do like Isaac's point about sort of, it hails the reader in a particular way, that seems kind of right to me. ?I'm always like, yeah, yeah, yeah. Any other yeah, more thoughts, more thoughts. And if if it's truly uninteresting to everybody, I can just like, sort of say what I think about it, but I also don't say what I think about it with much conviction. ?I kind of agree with one of this right out, I wrote Tom, it felt like he was like breaking the fullness. And it feels very, like.direct, like, he's like it feels like a command almost. And then I was thinking about about like in relation to like, I don't know which chapter it is, but like, were they list all the different ways. ?Yeah, I guess the same. And like, I love the like kind of random and digressive chapters that are in there feel like they're trying to almost like educate the reader and I feel like that kind of fits in to the tone of that as like, Ishmael as this kind of like authoritative speaker in relation to the lead. Yeah, maybe the idea of like identification and like like categorization also may may like like you can find it in this like three words like how like as he names like the different types of whales and he goes on to give like a description like the exact same way he's doing it for himself and maybe as well like the stories and the other people so maybe he's just hinting at how he will progress with like the rest of the story. ?Yeah yeah yeah no, these are all extremely interesting and suggestive ideas. I've always struck by like the length of the sentence. I mean, I was, yeah, an anecdote I have to share is that Zie, I went to a talk when I was in graduate school, that Zadie Smith gave. ?That was like, not a good talk. because it was like, it was not it was like, and I have like I admire Zadie Smith like a time, and especially maybe the nonfiction, like the like her nonfiction essays more than the novels. And but this talk she gave was like about how Twitter was ruining, the way everybody writes, which I felt like was kind of a boring argument. And somebody in the crowd, a faculty member in the Stanford English Department was like, call me Ishmail, because she was like complaining about like sentences were getting like shorter and more simple. ?And this English faculty member who I like admire a lot was like, call me Ishmael. It's like a short, simple sentence, like, like is there like it's like, why would that, why does, why do like the criteria, you' like, if you're suggesting that the English language is like becoming worse and worse because of social media, like, how do you describe like this one set, this one short, simple sentence being like the most, one of the most famous sentences in world literature. And I don't even remember what she said, but I don't feel like she had a good answer for it. ?So there's something about like the length of the sentence against, like, the vastness of the rest of the book or something that seems striking. But I don't know if there's anything like. This is basically the wall I'd run up to until like six months ago, I felt like I I have a better grip on it. ?Yeah, yeah, you definitely. I was just going to say kind of like again ties into the one it shows in the sunset it feels like, like what you just said about the monthly sentence against the buses for the rest of the book, cutting their like the individual in the fastness of nature, and like that's one to robots of, it kind of sets that as well. Yeah, physical manifestation. ?Yeah, yeah, that's really interesting. I want to get back to the rest, like, like, Isaac did a good job, describing, like, in these other paragraphs, like, what the restlessness is like, I guess like a question is like, why is Ishmael and why are all these people drawn to the ocean according to, according to Ishmael? And it's something about the restlessness people experience on land. ?But what is that, like, what is the source of that restlessness or what can we Yeah, what does that come from? It's like the openness of the ocean because he mentions that when they are on land, they are like tied to counters to benches and clinch to desks. I think it's the feeling of like freedom in a sense of like exploring and like maybe it links therefore to like like the multiplicity of like truth if we try to link it to that again like how you can go many different ways without being like restricted to like land cause in the ocean, like literally every direction is free for you. ?Yeah, no, I think to me that those last sentences are so crucial and like, yeah, like, I think it has to do with one thing. I think, you know, this is all me narrating how it came to my revelation about the first sentence, and it might all be kind of unconvincing to you. But like, one thing I realized recently is that Melville was like uniquely attuned to how like, the kind of alienation people experience working in certain urban environments. ?Like he has a story called Bartlele the Scriner. That's an awesome story that I encourage everybody to read, which is about this like copyist, the scrivener in, like a law firm in New York City who it's narrated by his boss and his boss keeps As like Bart shows up and starts working for the boss, and the boss asks him to keep doing certain tasks and he just says, I post itously. Bart just says, I prefer not to. ?And it makes the boss extremely uncomfortable and the boss keeps asking him to do more kind of clerical work and Barl just goes, I prefer not to. And this is like the drama of the story. And. ?I guess I'm bringing all that up here because it's worth like thinking about, I mean, I'll have more to say about this in a second. Like, the way, like, the way Ishmael is describing this like yearning for the ocean, for like the freedom of the ocean, all it blinds Isaac's describing, is like, he's kind of saying to everybody experiences this, but also in that moment at the end, it sort of is describing like a particular kind of like urban worker, like a white collar worker in the city. And I feel like I keep coming back to this point for the last few weeks, like, when we talked about Jekyll and Hyde, I was like, Jekyll and Hyde, it's about, like, four professional, bachelor men who seem really repressed, and, like, it's the story is sort of allegorizing, like, what happens when you're a professional man who's overly disciplined, and then, like, you have this, like, unhealthy relationship to your own desires and pleasures. ?And that's sort of what Jekyll had is allorizing, and we talked about, like, Sherlock Holmes is this like book that would be uniquely appealing to like a class of professional, middle class workers in the cities who like to like do puzzles in their spare time. And here I think, we're seeing like, like the freedom of the romance what's so appealing about it is this sort of like work that these urban workers are forced, this kind of like the repressive, like office work that people are made to do in modern societies. And I say people, it's also gendered. ?I think I'll have more to say about that. Like he says, posted like silent sentimels all around the town, stands thousands upon thousands of mortal men fixed in ocean reveries. And so there's much more to be said about gender, and I want to say that. ?But in a second, but I think the core point I want to bring out is that there's like, what's so appealing about the ocean as Imael's describing it in this first sentence, or sorry in the first chapter, and also kind of throughout the book, is this, like, kind of breaking free of these stultifying conventions that are like, inhibiting and kind of like alienating everybody in modern society, that's like Ishmael himself, who's like growing prima at the mouth and like wants to get out. You could say this is true of like the genres we were talking about before, like genre itself is like a kind of confining, like a convention, that kind of confines you and prevents you from accessing like the actual truth, no, one genre on its own can sort of like enable like it's yeah, the genre itself is a kind of like in classification as like sort of inhibiting kind of structures that that alienate us. And so I see Kby Ishmael like part of what I think is so, and I feel like this was beneath a lot of the comments you guys were making, like, you can imagine much more elegant first sentences of novels that like very subtly and intricately, like sort of begin to kind of draw you into this world that the novel is conjuring. ?But call Imanel, it's like, I'm not gonna like do any of that sort of like elaborate, like, mannered sort of introduction. I'm I'm just gonna like sort of like in the spirit of the adventure novel or the what I'll call in a second, the romance, he's just like, he's kind of breaking through these conventions and just saying, like, here I am, Am Imail. You don't really know if my name is Ishmael, but that's what you're gonna call me. ?It's like, there's something just like, like there's a certain type of unconventionality about it that I think is in keeping with this like sense of like, like, yeah, breaking out of old, old conventions and traditions that that are inhibiting and making everybody depressed.. We have such a comically little amount of time left. I'm just like, how can we best use our time? ?I guess I'll say, this is the moment to just say a few things about romance, since that's like the name of this unit. So like, romance as, as I was trying to say before, it's like one of these sort of like, I think you could describe it as one, like a sort of meta genre that, like, if you like, if you say the romance, which has this longer tradition that begins in the medieval period in these aristocratic cultures, Yeah, I'm just trying to order my thoughts to do the do all this explanation of the least confusing way possible. If you think about the romance as like defining itself in many respects against ordinary life and ordinary experience, and especially, like realism as a like on Monday, we're talking about George Elliot and like the monument of Victorian realism that is Middlemarsh. ?Like romance, these two genres are sort of in conflict throughout the, like, certainly by then of the 19th century, they're like, people like really fight over, which is the superior one. And that argument gets like sort of carried on into the 20th century in interesting ways that I'll try to gesture towards right now. But like, romance is, like, if realism sort of defines itself as like inhabiting that ordinary and the world of the everyday, romance is defining itself like, basically says, the ordinary and everyday is like the world of like, the stultifications of life. ?And so for romance to get at some sort of larger trump or reality requires taking experience to like the extreme, like the extremes of life to like in the United States, this is like the frontier deep into nature, the ocean, like, it's finding meaning in these like more like these experiences that are more extreme.. And why am I tough. And so in keeping with that, there's like a kind of like dissatisfaction with existing existing conventions and genres that normally organize literary experience or ordinary life. ?And so romance sort of like announces itself as like a rejection of any sort of like inhibiting constraint and whether that's like the realm of the everyday or whether that's a particular genres. Um. And I guess the reason we're talking about it all of this at our particular moment in this this term, like the way I explained in the first week of the term, how this how I kind of imagined this paper, it's like, in the 19th century literature is being mobilized in all these different ways. you have like Arnold, who's like, increasingly sees literature and culture as a mechanism of social control. ?But you also see people using literature to try to engage with scientific ideas and to produce scientific knowledge. You see people mobilizing literature in the service of industrial reform and in the service of abolition. and what other weeks have we had? Like,way, you have you have like of literature sort of like popular culture. ?We have those like Victorian ghost stories. So the point is, in the 19th century, literature sort of meant it could mean a bunch of different things, and there wasn't really like a hierarchy necessarily among these different meanings literature could take. Like sometimes these different versions of literature kind of came into conflict with each other, but it was still, like, very heterogeneous. ?Over the second half of the 19th century, you get an increasing higher, like hierarchies of culture, of culture and literature, where some literature is deemed better than others. And in the realm of the Victorian novel, that battle over like aesthetic value is waged between like people who like romance and people who liked realism. So we' we're gonna think about the realism stuff on Monday, Today, we're talking about romance and like, I guess like, and just to give you a sense of why this becomes relevant later in literary history, like this like romantic belief that ordinary, like conventions are bad stultifying, and that like, meaning or truth lies behind the like mask of everyday life, this is taken up by modernists. ?So Bobey Dick famously was like, had a pretty lukew reception. Nobody was particularly enthusiastic when they read it. Melville wrote some other stuff later if was going eventually, he, like had to stop writing because nobody wanted to read his work. ?And then it's only in like the 19 teens and the '20s where people are like, Moby Dick is like the greatest novel ever written, like D. Lawrence, all these other modernists were like Moby Dick is great. And so in part, the appeal of Moby Dick for the modernists was its sort of like dissatisfaction with conventions and genre, and all that stuff. So that's like the big story we're telling. ?Um. Okay, now we have any questions about this before I'm like, I try to figure out before how we can fill the final 13 minutes in a productive and interesting way. But that's like the sort of global point I wanted to draw up from this week's reading. ?Maybe let's talk a little bit about Ahabit versus Ishmael, which is there's no way we're going to do this in. This is probably going to be a more confusing conversation than it is clarifying, but it's one we probably should do. Another genre we didn't mention that I probably should have is that you can read this all and this Moby Dick has been read as a political allegory, as like, this is a story about, like, how democracy works and the dangers inherent in the democratic project where you have a tyrant taking over a ship Maybe let's yeah, maybe to have this conversation in sort of narrow terms based on what kind of in line with the conversation you've been having. ?What kinds of readers are, if we were going to say Ishmael, yeah, we've sort of begun to describe Ishmael as someone who does a particular as sort of a certain kind of reading Ahab is doing a certain kind of reading. Like, what? Yeah, like, like, are we getting two modes of reading here? ?I think we're getting two different modes of reading, maybe. And which one is the Herman Belle and Dorsinger, which one is the novel endorsing? I know we're just sort of leaping into this question. ?Is sure? He's endorsing Email. This whole conversation, we've all been describing, Ishmael is like the one, the novel agrees with. ?Does that that seem that a consensus we're working on? If the novel endorses Imael so much, why does Ismael just sort of disappear, like a third of the way through the novel after the quarter deck chapter?? I said Ish is actually A I don't know how much Yeah, do you remember like what the argument was for that? ?I think it was I don't, I think it was like to do with like this idea that the character had so much regret that he wanted to cover off the fact that he was. But then I left to oh, like literally like he was like projecting. Yeah, that's what he was doing. ?Yeah, I think that's kind of silly. But the but I think there are, so I think there are similarities between, like, I sort of said they're both like, they're both obsessive in a certain way. I mean when I wrote Iis Ishel as like existing outs. ?Like I read a half as the protagonist of the book and Inel was kind of just like an narrator and then, yeah, I really get why he just. I guess, like, he didn't he wasn't gonna add anything... Yeah, yeah. ?Trader Isaac, do you have any thoughts on this? I think it's right after the quarterback Col be just. Look, I think it's very striking when this happens. ?Yeah, yeah, Isaac, what do you think? I already eat the same way. I already ask Ishmael was just like the narrator who's narr's quest and then for some reason he's the narrator only because he survives at the end, but I feel like he didn't really like affect the story in anyway. ?He was just narrating it and like like with regards to like the actual adventure and the quest it was all like Aab like Starbucks and everyone else. He was just narrating the story yeah Yeah, he didn't That's all. Yeah, we are just reading his talks. ?And I think what kind of going back to all of the religious stuff that we said, or like, not even like religious I think. Like, if you read SA, how does the protagonist, then Moby it is antagonist. Well, I was going to say, actually, you could kind of read it the other way around if that makes any sense.'cause like, I feel like. ?Mo Dick is presented as better than A. I don't know if that is. So I feel like, um. through that the reason why it's not narrated from a house perspective is because my love wants you to like be at a distance from AARP. whereas, I mean, even though there are similararities between Ishnel and Aab, he's not as like directly arrogant and like insane. Yeah, no, they're definitely. ?They're like, there's certain. distinctions drawn between them two, for sure. I guess I'm just like, I was trying to remember where the chapters were basically, it might just be Enter Ahab to him stuff. It's chapter 29. ?Maybe where you're just like, they get on board the ship and all of a sudden Ishmael is narrating these scenes that he's not actually present for. And it's kind of striking. And this sort of goes along with this sort of the like stage directions and the like literal like the play format that the story takes on. ?So like, I guess, so yeah, maybe to provide some sort of context for the Ahab versus as Imael feud, for. So like Moby Dick, it's rediscovered by the modernists in the early 20th century. And then it's like, it's repute, it's prestige, only like gets greater and greater over the course of the 20th century. ?And for many like readers in the middle of the 20th century, there was the sense that the Oie Dick, the novel was the kind of allegory for the dangers of totalitarianism, so it was like taken up as like, like, oh, if you become enthralled to a dictator, like Ahab, that's really bad. And the kind of counter the alternative the story offers to Ahab is Ishmael, who becomes the sort of figure for a sort of liberal, like a kind of liberalism, basically, a kind of open minded ecumenical liberalism. And people have sort of disputed that reading in the last decade or two by saying that, like, what like ultimately a character like Ishmael, what's troubling about Ahab's rise is that it's kind of done with the consent of Ishmael and the other workers on board the ship, like, other people in different pathological schools have like, another famous scene is like when they're all squeezing the sperm in the, and it's like very homoerotic and they're like squ like Ishmael says, like, and we squeezed each like we squeezed each other into each other. ?It's It's a pretty funny chapter. And that, and so like some critics will point to that is this moment of like, against the kind of, like monomaniacal individualism of Ahab, you get like these workers, this kind of erotic scene where all the workers are squeezing the sperm together. But, like, the danger of, like, these readings of like Ishmael is a kind of model liberal against Ahab or that like the workers realize this sort of utopia against Ahab is that ultimately, like, everybody on board this ship kind of like votes Ahab in, like, Ishmael says at one point, like, I was, you know, I drank out of the cup. ?I like, you know, cheered Ahab on as well. And so I think, like, probably in the final four minutes, what I would say, and we globally, is that the book is like, I think the book is interested in like staging certain like stark contrasts between like the individual and the collective, between, you know, reading an adventure like that that we could have talked we could have spent this entire hour talking about the extracts and it might have been a little boring, but like the extracts are like, you know, the sub sublibrarian and the pale usher, these characters like that you just glimpse are like represented as like the decrepit, you know, decrepit people that spend all their lives in libraries or in the institutions that like adventure is like supposed to sort of take you away from, but that the book is so like the book is presenting all these sort of stark oppositions, life, I'm sure, life at sea, but ultimately the book is interested in like staging these oppositions and bringing them into kind of tense and fierce and antagonistic struggle with each other, but not necessarily like, reconciling them in any stable way. So, like, some other examples of this in the book are like, probably my favorite passage, which is like Ishmael or one of my favorite passages where Ishmael's like, in bed with quequeg, and he's like, you can't truly be warm unless part of your body is cold." ?Like, and he's like, you have to have your arm outside of, like, the bed sheets, because it's like the contrast is what makes comfort possible. Like, you can't he says something like one of like, the glorious, like, unluxuries of rich people is that they like to have a fire in their room, but really to be worn, you need part of your body to be cold. And similarly, like there's this description of ambergress, the like, like Stub gets that like perfume out of like the rotting cpse of a whale, and there's this like, it's like, you need to get this like very nice smelling thing out of the mouldering corpse of the whale for it to smell like it's it's like, I think ultimately Moby Dick, the novel, is just like invested in these sort of like stark oppositions that are like, that and these oppositions are sort of constitutive of modern experience, are like modern life, but like, and it's the struggle itself, I guess, that is like the important thing that can't be surmounted. ?This is obviously all very abstract and hard to wrap your mind around, but I think the big points I've conveyed, and, yeah, I'm trying to think of it parting clouds on this. But yeah, things in opposition. That seems really important. ?Any final questions or thoughts? We have a minute left. I guess I was going to say really quickly gender like romance so like globally there's this romance realism divide. ?There's also in the context of the United States really quickly, just like this battle between mostly male writers of romance and like female, middle class sentimentalists. And so like, the romance is like sort of decla like has this sort of complicated relationship to, like, the marketed market success, like women are selling, writing these sentimental novels that are selling in the hundreds of thousands. Whereas, like, Melville writes a novel that like doesn't even sell 2,000 copies. ?And so there's this, like design, the Gilmore, you can just read the Gilmore reading, Dexter Gilmore reading. If you're interested in these dynamics, but like in a kind of a world where literature has become a comeat, increasingly a commodity that's bought and sold, the romance is like trying to extricate itself from the logic of the market and commodification, but it's also kind of entangled in an interesting ways. And I will leave you all there. ?I'm always happy to talk more Moby Dick if you have more questions. But yeah, it's two o'clock. And we have another, and we have a we have a class in an hour and a half. ?Yeah, thank you all. Thank you.. two, All right, I'll see you all my days little very soon. Why' Vegas? ?Is that what you want? Yeah. How are you surv I been? ?It's not. I