. How's everybody doing? When do you have to leave? ?10 a.m. Wow. Can't wait, guys. It's too cold here. ?Today was pretty nice I thought. Yeah. It was gorgeous. ?Like in general, in general. In general. What is the temperature in Singapore right now? ?Like 35 Celsius CS. Oh, my God. What is the Okay, convert Fahrenheit That is very warm. ?Yes. Oh, I can't wait do back. That too warm? ?too warm? It's fine, it's fine. It's too cold here. ?Well, then why are you still in a t-shirt? Yeah. You can dress Yeah, dress warm wearing. ?I think. I will. Okay, welcome to the last tutorial of the term. ?This is These are exciting times. I've met Henry James today. It's interesting. ?I feel like a more traditional way of ending the class would have been to a sign like the ambassadors or, like one of these late shaves in novels that are very long and very difficult, but I didn't do that. Instead, I assigned these two stories. because I thought it would be more humane. I also think these are interesting stories. ?Did Amy or Aisha, did you read the other one or did you just read? Yeah, yeah. I read the other one. ?I always I always read all of the. Yeah, great. That's like what you. ?Yeah, and then I sort of pick the one that speaks to me more. Yeah, that's right. So we'll hear more about why Beast of the Jungle spoke to both of you. ?So put that. So maybe we'll start with Be Beast in the Jungle and then we'll spend like 25, 30 minutes on Beast in the Jungle. Then we'll do figuring the carpet. ?I feel like, so again, like, I picked these just because I was like, well, Beast in the Jungle, I picked because I think scholars love to write about it. And then figuring the carpet, I was like, I kind of like fig in the carpet. But I didn't I didn't have like an an especially like I wasn't I wasn't being very sort of, I wasn't being very strategic or like intentional when I paired these two. ?I was just like, these are two stories. They're interesting. We'll have lots to talk about. ?But I do actually think they speak to each other in interesting ways. So, so, yeah, so 25 ish minutes on Beast in the Jungle, 25 ish minutes on figuring the carpet and then we'll talk about them together and probably the fig in the carpet conversation, we can just kind of do them both as we're doing that. In any event, we'll have Amy and Aisha since you're functionally writing about the same path. ?We'll just have you both kind of talk us through your your essays at the beginning, and then we'll we'll kind of, you know, look around, we'll like jump to other moments in the text you to continue to think about some of the issues you both raised. So maybe Amy goes first and then Ayeshisha. Yeah, basically, Acho's, like, the final team. ?I didn't realize I shouldn't the same one, like basically the same passage. But really? It was the. ?When I was reading it, I can highlight stuff it was the bit that I was like, I was load here to go through. Yeah, my iPhone is basically that there's sort of like, it's a tragedy, but it's also like a narcissist who sort of has this internalized faith and I thought it was kind of interesting looking at like love and death next to each other and also the article I read at the first article I read was it all about basically the fact that like, oh, this was this one was like the this story in particularly is exactly like it's a record of James and like that it's basically just him in a story that he's wrote himself, which are those interesting but I didn't want to like argue that because I think it's kind of weird arguing about a writer when it's about a story but yeah, I don't know what else to say. Yeah, I think we're going to come back to that point though. ?Yeah, you should Yeah, I think I read something similar, but also I don't, it wasn't definite to me, so I didn't want to like pursue an entire essay on something that I wasn't completely sure about. I also sort of read something biographical about him that was nodding towards that he tend to write about like homototic things and so when I read that I then refrained the way in which I read the book and I thought, oh wait, there is a lot of that in here. So I sort of ran with that idea a little bit. ?I feel as I could have pushed my idea a bit more, but because it was a close reading as well, I think what stopped me from pushing my ideas more was the fact that I was focusing on the close reading and I was bringing in art as well and so I didn't have the space to pursue some ideas in a way that I might have wanted to or even to think about them, to be honest, I was just more caught up in the close reading of it. but I basically just argued that the beast is only present due to a repression of like a homosexuality. And then the jungle is his sort of a culination of the person that he curates in order that he keeps the beast hidden. Yeah. ?Cool. And I think like this issues that have come up already are the ones where going to discuss, I think, in both stories like I'm interested like we could say broadly in like the erotics of James's work. Let's say that as capaciously as possible and and there's like this homerotic element that will have a lot more to say that I think. ?But then I'm also interested in what the relationship is between that and like James who, if you read, like, I think Ayeshisha read the Mark McGirl Secondary book, the argument of that book is basically that Henry, like, until that moment in literary history, the novel has these sort of lowly associations, and it's considered to be a product of popular mass culture, and Henry Jane, the argument of this book is basically that Henry James and all these modernist authors that come after him are responsible for transforming the novel into an art form and for basically proposing or like sort of advocating for a particular vision of what literature can be in society, that, you know, James is just basically this transition figure on the way to modernism. Maybe I'll just, since we're already into this rant, I'll just like finish it and then we can get back to the story. So, as I think we've charted over the course of this term, for much of the 19th century, there is, you know, literature is being mobilized for all these different social kind of agendas and all these social projects. ?And there are occasionally over the course of the 19th century, efforts to like elevate certain kinds of writing over other kinds of writing. But for the most part, it's a fairly, like literature, especially, I should say, probably like by literature, I mean like vernacular English literature. I think there is still this hierarchy between the classics and English literature, but in English literature, it's very heterogeneous. ?There isn't, I would say, like, like, there isn't a successful, like, there isn't a successful project to truly elevate certain forms of English literature over others. It's a pretty motley field. By the time you get to the turn of the 20th century, and especially with the rise of modernism in the early 20th century, you have literature associated with, you know, narrower, like body of cultural objects, and that body of cultural objects that's called the literature is distinguished from popular culture, mass culture, and in many respects I think we'll talk about things like, it really, like modernist literature really goes to great lengths to try to sort of like distinguish itself from mass culture. ?And we can talk more about what that means, but there's this kind of rejection of mass culture, rejection of the commodity, like the commodification of culture, and that sort of defines the modernist project. James is sort of like a transition, a transitional figure between the more democratic understanding of English literary culture, and a more hierarchical one. Okay., and then so the question that's really on my mind, and that I think Aesha's paper bes explicitly is like, what does what do these two things, like James is like repressed sexuality and his like love of literature as art? ?Let do these things have to do with each other. I' I don't know if I have like a clear answer for that if I' think it's interesting. Anyway. um maybe we'll start with the question of like, and I guess what I'll say is it's striking to me Amy and other people. ?Like there's basically, I would say the people who wrote a bad Beast in the jungle, it came down in two camps. There were people who either sort of assumed it was bad repressed homosexuality or then there were people who were like, talked about other things like Amy did. And I would say now, like, in like scholarship on Beast in the Jungle, everybody just kind of assumes it's kind of a story about a repressed gay man, and the question is, but I think it's worth sort of like trying to work through the story a little and try to see where that repression comes up and whether the story is reducible just to an allegory of like repressed sexuality or whether there are other things going on in it. ?So maybe before we get to the final scene, we're talking about the final scene, I thought maybe we could focus on the very first, like this moment where May reveals that she knows about Marcher's secret. and let me find the page number, really fast. It's a long passage. And I guess like the question I want to ask is like, how do we know that he like that this is a story about repressed homosexuality, just reading this moment? ?And so maybe I'll read it just to speed things along. So this it's a sentence that begins if you want to control effort. You know you told me something that I've never forgotten. ?And so, like, as I'm reading this, I' want you to like, have in one part of your mind, like, I want you to be like listening out for like the possibility of queer, of like a kind of queer subtext here. But I also want you to be like, keeping an open mind and say like, well, how do I even know that this is a queer subtext? Have you found it out your shot? ?Yeah. Thank you. Okay, so I'm just going to read. ?And this is May's speaking. You know you told me something that I've never forgotten, that again and again has made me think of you since. It was that tremendously hot day when you went to Sorrento, across the bay for the breeze, what I allude to was what you said to me on the way back as we sat under the awning of the boat, enjoying the cool. ?Have you forgotten? He had forgotten, and he was even more surprised than ashamed that the great thing was that he saw it was no vulgar reminder of any sweet speech. The vanity of women had long memories, but she was making no claim on him of a compliment or a mistake. ?With another woman, a totally different one, he might have feared the recall possibly even he might have feared the recall, possibly even some imbecile offer. So in having to say that he had indeed forgotten, he was conscious rather of a loss than of a game, he already saw an interest in the matter of her reference. I try to think, but I give it up. ?Yet I remember the Sorrento day. I'm not very sure you do, May Bartram after a moment and said, and I'm not very sure I ought to want you to. It's dreadful to bring a person back at any time to what he was 10 years before, if you've lived away from it," she smiled. ?"So much the better. Ah, if you haven't, why should I?" he asked. ?"Lived away, you mean, from what I myself was, from what I was? I was, of course, an ass, Markcher went on, "but I would rather know from you just the sort of ass I was than from the moment you have something in your mind, not knowing anything. Still, however, she hesitated. ?Butut if you've completely ceased to be that sort, why I can then just sw all the more bear to know. Besides, perhaps I haven't? Perhaps yet if you haven't, she added, I should suppose you would remember, not indeed that I am the least connect with my impression, the invidious name you use. ?If I had only thought you foolish, she explained, the thing I speak of wouldn't so have remained with me. It was about yourself she waited, as if she might come to him, but as only, her eyes in wonder, he gave no signs, she burned her ships. Has it ever happened? ?That it was that, while he continued to stare, a light broke for him and the blood slowly came to his face, which began to burn with recognition, do you mean I told you? All right, these are so super thin and difficult to turn. Do you mean, I told you, but he faltered lest what came to him, shouldn't be right, lest he should only give himself away. ?It was something about yourself that it was natural. One shouldn't forget, that is, if one remembered you at all, that's why I ask you, she smiled. "If the thing you then spoke up has ever come to pass. ?Oh, that he saw, but he was lost in wonder and found himself embarrassed. This, he also saw made her sorry for him, as if her illusion had been a mistake. It took him but a moment, however, to feel that it had not been much as it had been to feel that it had not been, much as it had been a surprise. ?After the first little shock of it, her knowledge on the contrary began, even if rather strangely, to taste sweet to him. She was the only other person in the world than who would have it, and she had had it all these years, while the fact of his having so breathed his secret had unaccountably faded from him. No wonder they couldn't have met as if nothing had happened. ?I judge, he finally said, that I know what you mean, only strangely enough lost the consciousness of having taken you so far into my confidence. Is it because you've taken so many others as well? I've taken nobody, not a creature since then. ?So that I'm the only person who knows, the only person in the world. Well, she quickly replied, "I myself have never spoken. I've never, never repeated of you what you told me.Mbe I'll just stop here, and I could keep going because that's very interesting all along these lines. ?But, like, how do we know that this is all about homosexuality? Like, what are the Yeah, what are the indications? I think the fact that he sort of forgot what it was that he said, because being a homosexual officer is like such an intrinsic part of one's personality that you don't necessarily recognize it as a like a distinct entity within yourself. ?It's just sort of something that it is there, like in the same way that I have b eyes. I didn't think about that when I wake up in the morning. And so that's why you couldn't quite remember in my head anyway, I'm sure it can be in temperatures other ways. ?And then when it says, then it was that while he continued to set a light broke for him and the blood slowly came to his face, which began to burn with recognition, it's sort of as though he is embarrassed and shocked that he might have revealed to someone at this point in time, 1903 or whenever, he was writing the book that it wasn't it wasn't well received that someone might be homosexual, so the fact that he has admitted that to someone becomes a point of like embarrassment or like preciousness between them and it becomes this intimate moment between them that they share this piece of knowledge. But if it's such a special piece of knowledge, then it's weird to me that he couldn't remember it first. Yeah. ?Do you have any thoughts about this Amy? Yeah, I kind of I mean, when I read it, I was like, because I read another thing that did mention like, oh, it could be like a homosexual like narrative. But I was like, I know if it was enough for me to like fully go along that argument and like, if if it is, then like, how come it's such a long love story and like it's so a convolut? ?There's so many, like stages and then the death I was just like, it just feels like a lot for it just to be like, oh, he's actually just homosexual. Yeah, but I think that's the point. You know that's the point. ?That's the point is that that's the way It's so long, but if you think about it, if you're a homosexual at that time it would have seemed a lifetime longer if you had to spend it with someone that you didn't truly love. And this is only mimicking the fact that there are lots of gay men that had to like have lavender marriages and marry people that they didn't love in order that they might have a real life And so their love story is a love story. I'm not like, I'm not removing from that and I do think they truly did love each other, but I think that how James is trying to define trueness, like real life and true love is in the subtext of the book. ?Do you have any thoughts about this, Isaac? I didn't see any homosexual encies at first in the beast in the jungle, but when I was writing my essay of course, I had to read like stuff on Henrynry Jamesuality, but I felt like the ways that people analyzed the beast in the jungle, like they were only able to see a homosexual like sort of like reading of it because of their new found understanding of Henry James and I feel like when I read this, like I really don't get it any sense of like a queer like undertone at all and I'm I I don't know maybe it's just I get confused with like his writing stuff. Well, that's something else we're going to talk about. ?I was just going to say, I think it's very like, you have to be careful when you're like reading about the writer and then saying something about the story because I think it changes I think you have to look it as an objectively. That's why I not to at first as well. I was trying to just read it and have my own thoughts but then because my own thoughts weren't really like. ?So I went and read around it and then it sort of that jump started my train of thought. I think I did run with ideas that had already been beaten to death and I was sort of beating a dead horse a little bit. Were there, I guess one question I have is there's so much to be said about this. ?It's like crazy, like this whole system is just crazy tutorials and seminars, but we're going to have to do our best. So what was I about to ask? So for those of, and I will say, I think I can't even recall the first time I read this, I must have been in graduate school, but I'm not sure if they'll like queer reading was present in my head as I read it. ?And I mostly just knew. And so I guess the one question I have is, how are you reading it if it's not, if it's not about March or, the repressed gay man, how are you interpreting what's going to dynamics that are going on here? And, yeah, maybe I'll start with that question. ?Oh, interpret it more as a trauma rather than necessary, like, I think being hom sexual in that time is a trauma in itself, but if you're not calling it homosexual repression, then just a trauma in general and he's waiting for the trauma to somehow manifest itself in his personal relationships, or it could also be like, like I think we both talk about narcissism so it could be that I think it's something more interpersonal without labeling it as like homosexual, you know. Yeah, yeah. Kind of controversial, but like, when I read it, I was like, yeah, it's a narcissist. ?This is a narcissist. And then I read other things, it was like, oh, we could be homosatia or like trauma, like that's can be kind of opposite yeah But I don't, yeah, but like if you're saying, if we're saying it's narcissism, which I know why I send it to, but if we are saying that I'm going to let go against myself, I think that, like, if he's saying he's laying in wait for this beast to jump out of him and if the beast does notarcissism, then he's clearly aware of aware of this narcissism and to be narcissist is inherently not to be aware of the fact that you are one, so I did he or maybe the fact that he's created this whole narrative around it is a narcissism that. Yeah.. ?It's like.. Oh my God. Yeah. ?Yeah. No, what's. So, and so another question I'll ask before we start talking about the final passage which we haven't gotten to yet, is would it make sense when we took, because I think all of us, me especially, have been using the language of, like, repressed homosexuality. ?Does it make sense to describe this story as a product of a marcher's repressed homosexuality or Henry James's repressed sexuality? Does that make sense as a question, and I think it's more appropriate to, like, Bob, the whole reason I read it in the way that I did is because of my biographical knowledge of James, so I think it's fair to say that it's, like a person seeps into their writing, they can't you can't stop yourself from like seeping into your writing. So I think it's definitely James and I think March there's perhaps a little bit of propressimosexuality, but I think he's more complex than that and to boil it down to just that, which is what I did. is negating other more impactful parts of his personality. ?So I think it's James that is.. James is living within March a little bit in that way. Yeah. ?And this gets back to Amy's point, which I thought was super interesting in the response paper about, like, in the final scene, the convergence between the third person narrator and Marcher. I feel like this is, like, this conversation is relevant to that. I think, like, just to give a sense of the stakes of this, like, if you read the repression as James is, in the sceneenes, I was read that I read at C Lang. ?Then you're like.. There is no.. If it's James' repression, then there's, like, the possibility that Marcher is gay is just like emerging or bubbling up to the surface of the text, even though James is telling a story about this narcissist who wants, who distinguished himselfuishes himself and sort of like, whose whole kind of conception of himself is wrapped up in the fact that he's going to experience this, like, exceptional form, like this exceptional catastrophe that's going to mark him as different from everybody else. ?And that that catastrophe, I guess another thing I'll say to here is that what it folds over those pages I read is basically the same sort of structure that repeats itself in the story as a whole. So in the scene, you have the secret or mystery that emerges. And in this case, it's like, what did March tell May all those years ago? ?And when the secret is kind of proposed by the text, it could be like, they're like, you know, millions of like possibilities of what that secret could be. And amongst those millions of possibilities are like he told her he was gay, and I will say like when I first read it, I like, didn't really see the gay reading. And this time as I was reading it, it was really this opening scene where like the blood is draining from his face and I was like, oh, if you're a, like, if you're reading the at that time, that's like an option, like that's a possibility that you'd have to entertain as a reader that that is there. ?But in any event, what happens in this moment is there's this universe of possibilities what the secret can be, and then it's just like, it ends up being this one name thing by the text. He believes he's destined for some horrible thing. And the same thing happens with the same thing happens with, like, the catastrophe itself, like, what is the catastrophe that's gonna face Marcher? ?It could be anything. It could be the fact that he's gay, but ultimately, the text kind of kind of decides on one answer. And an interesting other question to that dec like, I mean, you could say maybe the text does this with Mae's secret, because that's like, that's like, probably the third principal secret in the story is like, Mae appears to like, know what Mar this catast catastrophe is that's facing Marcher, and she doesn't say it, and you could say that when Marcher realizes in that final episode that you guys wrote a about, is that, like, May may sort of recognize and understood all along that, that marther was destined to be like a witness for his own life, that he was destined to be the only man who had never really lived. ?Nothing could happen to him or her, the text puts in.. Why am I going. So anyway, like, I think the text works in this interesting way where it like presents a lot of possibilities and then ultimately chooses one. ?And the question like one answer and the question is whether that answer, that it lights upon and kind of eliminates all the other ones, whether like the kind of queer reading can kind of like, like the reading you do of the story is based on how you interpret, I feel like that movement. And so like, because I want to turn to figuring the carpet really quickly, I'll just say, like, there are two ways of reading, and I think we're going to continue talking about Beast in the Jungle, but they're kind of two ways of reading the story, and that ending particularly one of which describes dreams himself as a repressed gay man, and the other describing Marcher as aressed gay man. And so the first reading of James himself as the repressed gay man is that actually what happens in those final paragraphs that you guys are writing about is that the like, the texts kind of imposes this kind of morality story onto onto Marcher's life. ?And basically says, "If this man just recognized that he was in love with this woman, that if he just entered into this heterosexual relationship, he would have been happy. And so this is a kind of conservative reading of this story that in this final moment, yeah, the story like realizes that the secret to life, it kind of associates passion in life with conventional heterosexual marriage, and any kind of queer content is like kind of repressed down and bubbles up at unexpected places in the story, but ultimately, it's fundamentally a bath how this guy just should have loved this woman all along. And then the alternative reading to that first one, which is that actually, and both of these are based on archival work that's been done pretty recently, so that first reading is like largely based on this relationship Henry James himself had with a woman, where he, like, she was in love with him, and he kind of, you know, did exactly what Marsha did to May in the story. ?The other reading is actually to say that James was far less repressed at this kind of later moment in his life. And that he was a part of like, this emerging, queer community in England. So Oscar Wilde at this tried for soy, I believever, like, you can read about the trial on the Internet. ?In 1895, so there's this, like atmosphere of repression around, but notwithstanding that atmosphere of repression, there still are these immersion queer communities in late Victorian, England, that James himself is like linked up to, and they all speak write to each other about like their sexual desires using this like very coded and euphemistic language that outsiders can really understand. And so another reading of the story is that James is like deploying this like secret kind of queer euphemism, and the way they read biography onto the story in these terms of that James himself had this relationship with an ambiguously gay man who was much younger than him, who, like, kind of didn't realized he was gay, and so James himself, as he's writing the story, actually puts himself into the story as the figure of May, that May is much more of the sort of autorial stand in than Marcher, and that May has this kind of knowing satisfaction that this other guy like, James is telling this other younger guy who didn't like him back, basically, that you're a repressed homosexual, but I am becoming, like kind of more aware of my sexual identity. I'm really rehearsing these readings a lot. ?There's a lot more interesting stuff to be said about it, and hopefully we'll kind of fold all this into a discussion of what is going on in figuring the carpet. So do you want to talk us a little bit Isaac, through your response? Yeah, so the reason why I chose in the cup was because like Henry James is such, like a convoluted writer. ?So like I really had to like pick like each like line of paragraph, like line by line and the paragraph that I eventually ended up choosing to me cannot be read in any other way than like sex show and I feel like like for I didn't get this sense in any other part of the short story as well as in the peace of the jungle that's why when I was reading the the parts about Henry James and like sexualities and like some other like secondary readings. I was super surprised that no one talked about Fig a carpet but in the jungle and like his other like later texts were so like widely written upon and then I couldn't find any secondary readings on erotter sization of language and figure in a carpet so yourselves. Yeah, I had to like, like, which is why I was complaining to you, like, before tutorial that day that I was struggling with that essay yeah, but once I read the assigned secondary reading, then the argument basically came out that because of the ways that we can read other of Henry James' texts as utilizing like sexual euphemisms and sexual language. ?Then we can also read this text in that way and it like sort of like embodies like like basically one of the threads in the figure in the carpet and demonstrates that like that is basically like allows you to read it in that way. Yeah, but the entire life eroticize the argument was basically that basically like the narrative like edges the reader in a sense by like it just keeps on like hinting at revelation and then not giving you that relev revelation at all in like throughout the entire short story and it also presents the narrator as like being super like self gratifying with regards to like his like view of like the search for meaning yeah so by showing that that by contrasting basically different like interpretive desires and viewing it in a sort of like a sexualized lens, it basically shows like his critique of like and commentary on the auttter critic relationship. Yeah that was basically the argument. ?Yeah, yeah. Where, where to begin? Yeah, they're like they're like, I feel like 10 different things we need to talk about right now. ?Maybe I'll just say, I'm going to say a few of them out loud, so we make sure we touch on them. I want to talk about. We need to talk at some point about the difficulty of Henry James's writing. ?We need to talk about, which, as I mentioned at the very beginning, we need to talk at some point about, or actually, this one I feel less invested in us talking in about, but the passage Isaac circulated, this is like the narrator kind of reproducing, you would say, Corvette, like a letter he gets from Corvic about how he's found the secret hidden treasure or whatever. And I guess like a question I'll pose is like whether there actually whether Cor actually finds a figure figure in the carpet and whether they're is a figure in the carpet. That's like a question, I feel like we could talk about. and how that affects Isaac's reading, which I think is very interesting. ?We need to talk about, I feel like the alternative mode of, or like Isaac, like points to a kind of different form of reading, like reading or interpretation or hereneutics. That isn't the kind of odinistic, like, self gratifying version of the narrators, but is the kind of reciprocal exchange between Corvic and Gwendolyn. I want to talk about that. ?And the last thing I feel like we need to talk about, which I think is the thing that most directly links these stories, is this sort of like how they're organized around these secrets or mysteries. So those are all the things I want to talk about. Where should we begin? ?I can't decide. Yeah, Isaac, do any of those, do you want to take up any of those that you want to? Um, if you get the second of the one the weather COVIDs the figure in the carpet and whether the ease a fig in the car. ?I feel like that is because I feel like the text just explicitly said that Koik like asks Vgo whether he found the text and Verican said yes but with regards to like whether that is a singular like figure in the carpet I think like it's it's a bit hard because no I I don't really know what to say. It's basically like whether like there is one singular figure in the carpet that is like that is there or whether the figure in the carpet changes for each individual person that reads it in the different way that they can read attacks and I feel like I lean more towards the letter, but I'm not sure whether these texts puts forth that argument. I feel like they put forth the argument that there is like one singular hidden meaning that the author sort of like doesn't mean to, but always ends up like putting into the text that we can find if we want to, but that is really hard and that basically we need to like read the auttter sex as a whole In you should do have opinions about whether there actually is a figure in this carpet. ?And I'm going to give the stronger reading vibe there's not, the weather's not. Or I'm gonna, yeah, I'll propose some things about why there might not be. I think I agree with Isaac. ?I think that the novel itself does put forward the idea that there is one singular sort of figure just because I think the transference of like the cure the narrator's curiosity to then Gwendolyn's widowed husband at the end is sort of like now they're looking for something and they both have a shared interest in this one figure in the carpet and it just all seems very unitary, like how they're going about it, but in saying that the way I'm inclined to interpret it because I feel like I always view things less as a microcosm of just that novel, but more as like, what something's tried to say, what society as a whole, I would think I would say that the figure in the carpet doesn't actually exist and it's different for everyone and it's more it's not a tangible thing, it's an idea. So, but that would be my reading. and that's not necessarily what the text sayss. So perhaps that reading is wrong, but I think in the book they try and make it tangible. ?Maybe for digestibility of the reader. That. That's an interesting discussion, yeah, Amy. ?Yeah, that that's basically what I was going to say, just that it's, you, it's the figure in the carpet, because you're never going to know what it is. When I when I wrote it, I was like, I actually don't know, but I think that's kind of the point. But yeah.. ?He also says it's a figure, like a figure in a Persian car. Yeah, he does say that like a Persian rug, which I feel like that maybe has some sort of undertone to it of finding other cultures bewildering. I don't know whether I can push that idea. ?It could be like, yeah, I don't have strong. I don't have a strong reading of the Persian carpet, but that's definitely what it says. Like, you could maybe lump it into the like register of like treasure, like buried. ?Like, I feel like there's like a register of like adventure associated with the finding of the text textual meaning. And so maybe that's what the like the Persian carpet. COVIC finding the meaning when he travels. ?Yeah, yeah. That's really interesting. I mean, the argument that Corvick actually doesn't find the figure in the carpet is we just have to take his word for all these things. ?Like, he says in a letter, like to just rehearse this, I like wrote down on the painstapingly last night, very late, was just like writing down all the p numbers because I think one thing about the story that's odd is how much, how it obsessed. It's like, the narrator is obsessed, obviously, with finding the figure in the carpet. He doesn't really, like read the books that much, which is kind of curious. ?And instead, the book spends a lot more time like talking about Gwendolyn and Corvick's relationship in a way that's that's interesting that we' talk about, I think, in a second, but, like, to rehearse this, like, what, what unfolds, Corvipp and Gwendolyn are, like, like definitely there's this erotic charge in their relationship to like trying to find the figure in the carpet. and then and then they're just like clearly deriving a lot of pleasure from this literary mystery. And then they kind of like cool off Corbick says they're estranged from each other. He goes to he takes this job in India as a correspondent and is going to make all this money going there. ?I forget if he I think he gets there and then says that he's found the figure in the carpet, goes to visit the writer Verekker I always forget his name. I just call it him down as V in my notes. Verker. and then says Verker told him he got it and that he'd tell them and then but he never ends up tellinging them and he dies. ?So there's a reading and so I guess like the question is, maybe, yeah, the thing that I'm more interested in around this kind of plot line is what all this says. Like, I think there's, like a lot of this larger, like existential question or something about whether there is a figure in the carpet at all. There's, like, some sort of, there is like a kind of a little bit of ambiguity about it, but I'm more interested in what that says about this, like alternative model of reading that Isaac is trying to identify where somehow if Gwendolyn and Corvick are doing is superior to what the narrator is doing. ?And I guess I just want to talk through that a little bit more. Like, why is what they're doing superior to what what the narrator is doing? I will be honest that the only reason I came up with is like alternative reading was because I saw the narrator's desire as masterurbatory and I was trying to think of an alternative. ?So when I was looking at the fact that so much time was spent in the couples and the fact that like he fashions like the sort of like like interpretive quest for me as like a sexual con quest and like intercourse then when you look at a married couple and how they spend so much time and pleasure and like there's a lot of like talk about them like working together It really speaks of like a sexual, like intercourse, sort of relationship and then from there, like there's this contrast between like like self pleasuring masturbation and like a sexual relationship that is like relational and needs like two parties to like work together perfectly and then like that's where I came up with this risk yeah yeah yeah yeah. And so and like I think the politics of this reading would be, you could also read it as conservative that like it's the it's the heterosexual couple. And I think the narrator at one point says like, he's opining and he's like, is this secret is the secret in the carpet only like, can it only be revealed to people who are married to each other? ?Yeah, I had a follow-up question about this. I guess, like, maybe let's talk for a second too, about. I guess, yeah, so here's my question. ?This is mostly for Isaac, but Amy, are you sure you either of you can chine in two. It's like, if the point of the story is to criticize the narratator's reading habits as like masturbatory. Why then is like what you've described as narrative edging? ?Why is the story told in the form of narrative edging? Does that make sense? as a question? ?My idea was it's just that the narrative is the narrative is the right the narrator's form of taking revenge on the reader. which is why the narrator like edges the reader as sort of a revenge, which he mentions in the last episode. But that would be your ownistic, then. That would be sort of like, that would be like the narrator and the reader in their own sort of sexual game with each other. ?It would no longer be.. Thomas James. James, you? ?Yeah, no. Like, at the end of the poem, he says, like the poem man' state. It's like he's consolation. ?Yeah, yeah. So I assume that he really loves playing this game because he did the exact same thing with the widowed husband of Gwendolen. Yeah. ?So in playing this game with the reader, he's sort of like takes revenge on us. But I feel like by criticizing and by showing if they really did find the secret showing that it is possible to find the secret and showing how they find the secret that's where like the reader can sort of like subvert the narrator's reading and like edging of us, you know? Yeah. ?But I feel like we really like just like doesn't want anyone to find the secret Yeah.. And yeah. Are you sure I mean do you guys have any opinions about this? ?We have 15 minutes left. I don't know how he comes up with this though. Isaac or Henry G. I know why. ?I don't know. I mean, it's interesting to think about. I thought it was interesting that you said that the No and the reader were in their own sort of like sexual relationship with one another.. ?Who's to say to say. You know what? Colles their boundary. ?Yeah, all of this is so like preliminary I feel like everyone reads something in their own way. And it depends on your state of mind. so you're reading it. I think you should stop talking it. ?Yeah. I guess like, so to me, I guess like my kind of suspicion of the that Gwendolen and Corvick have it figured out is like, I just like, to me, their relationship seems so twisted and unhealthy in many ways. And you don't know exactly, you know, there are a lot, there are like a lot of gaps in the story we hear about them. ?So like we don't really know why they seem to be estranged before Corvick that goes to India. We don't know. There's just like a lot we don't know. ?And it seems like the way the narrator reads what happens to Gwendolyn after she dies that like Gwendoline herself has sort of like an exploited relationship to Corvick. and like, I mean, the suggestion, I think is that Corvick wants to find the secret, so Gwendolyn will marry him, and so he, like, dangles this for her, like this secret for her, that the that she can then that that she then takes in the moment he dies, she just like sort of lives off like the narrator describes her sort of like, it's like her endowment that she she gives to her next marriage. So there's like. There's a sense in which I feel like all the relationships in the story are like pretty twisted and damaged. ?And, like, I guess where I want to turn in a second is just like what we can say. If we wanted to make make more sort of abstract or general statements reading both of the stories together, like what they say about what they say about, I mean, this is now I'm trying to move us into this question of like, what is the relationship between these sorts of queer readings of Henry James's work and his like obsession with art. And if, yeah, does anybody like, Aisha wrote about this explicitly maybe even even before we try to answer that question, let's just talk about why is Henry James such a difficult writer? ?I think maybe in his attempt to elevate the status of the novel, he wanted to somehow make it more. He wanted to like, oh, he wanted to appeal to an upper echelon of society that weren it was sort of like literature was becoming more and more accessible through printing and mass publication and whatnot. And so through making his work more convoluted and more like strenuous to understand, he was trying to make it more inaccessible or accessible to people that he deemed worthy of accessing it. ?So maybe in writing queer narratives, he was sort of trying to like socially distinguish between people that he deemed worthy of awarding literature too. So like, the Homosexual undertones were like a like a little secret in themselves, like their own figure in the carpet of like reading a book and if you were able to discern that undertone, you deemed worthy of having got the essence of his writing and that you have now elevated the novel to art and you have understood entire sort of point of becoming a writer. Yeah, that's interesting. ?It might be like two things at the same time. Like I agree that he's writing like necessitates you to look at it like really closely like I've never spent so much time reading one short paragraph as I have with Henry James, but I feel like on the other hand, I feel like he makes the same convoluted because of like him trying to hide stuff in his writing and like because of the fact that he's trying to like conceal a lot of things in his writing, like he I don't know whether he wants people to find certain readings of his or whether it's like just out of like an outlet for him to write, but I feel like in both ways he wants people to look more closely, but he also wants to distance himself linguistically from like the readers of his pets.. That's really interesting. ?I guess like, yeah, I want to come back to all of these points and I'll just say, I'll just, I'll, I want to perceive this one point that Ayeshisha made, and that Isaac made two, which is like difficulty is a way of distinguishing, you know, writing that is art from all of the other garbage that's out there in society. And I guess like if that's and what we're going to bring in the queer stuff again in a second. But if that's true, why does James have all these like, why is like mystery so fundamental to his stories? ?It's quite taunting. It's taunting, that's interesting. Because you also said earlier Aisha, you were like, it makes it more accessible. ?It might make it more accessible, because like the fact that these stories are frame this mysteries. Yeah, it might make it more accessible in the way that it tornunts people and it encourages them to kind of think about things a bit deeper and perhaps it's a amusing to him that he frames it as a mystery or he frames it as like there's a secret to be found and it's amusing to watch people sort of kill them Charles kill themselves trying to understand it when he knows that perhaps the meaning is something that is like that is genuinely inaccessible to them. It's something that he's written for his own from his ownition and it's just something that isn't accessible at all in the thing, but the fact that he teases it is part of the pleasure of her at all, maybe, and that's what makes it art is that he's proud to prove the point that art is interpretive, and therefore you shouldn't go into it, trying to find this thing that I've like, if you ti a piece of art, you're then looking at it through its title. ?But he's perhaps trying to prove a point that you shouldn't go into things, trying to find something and that's the entire point of it is that it's meant to be interpretive. So why are you trying to view it from my point of view of when I was writing it? You should instead just read it for what it is?, this is interesting. ?I like idea of.. No, no, don't. I like the idea of, like, haunting the reader. ?I feel like the idea of like power play comes into like how he like becomes someone one, like pating the reader when in society, maybe he was like, in like. felt maralized. Yeah. Basically. ?Just like him becoming the one in power now.. I like the idea. I don't know if it's like real, but I feel like it might have played the part. ?Yeah. Yeah, this is very interesting. I'll also say that like, yeah, yeah. ?So just on this one point, I feel like another thing you could say, which is what Mark McG girl says, is that like, and other people have said this about James, that like, and monitism more broadly, that even as they're trying to distinguish what they're doing from mass culture, they're still like, it's not like they can actually successful, like the modernist artists actually succeeded in, like. creating, like, a firewall between art in the market, that, in fact, there's, like, it's a much more agonized exchange, and one of the ways you can see this is in the ways that James's novel. Like these stories, like internalize the mystery plot as like how they operate, and, like some of it, like you could people think that or this guy, Peter Brooks makes this argument about meodrama and trains that even as he's like trying to write these works of like very high art, that are like fundamentally extremely melodraumatic. So just to recur, I'm very satisfied with these answers we're generating for, like, how like the relationship between queerness and art for Henry James are kind of like kind of tied up with each other. ?And so like, yes, like, Ayesha is saying that, like, just as, like, the modernist, modernist prose fiction, like, is difficult and tries to distinguish, like, superior readers from inferior readers in the same way, kind of how sort of like queer community formation or how queer art works is by trying to distinguish, like basically creating like communities that are within the kind of like, are within the queer community and understand can kind of decode these like more enigmatic references that James is like playing with in the story. And Isaac is saying that that you can read the difficulty as itself, a kind of, like, a product of a particular kind of pathologized, queer psychology, where you're like trying to discuss like like the disguising of meaning is baked into the experience of being a queer person in Lake Victorian culture. And so one form that that disguise disguising my take is by like a certain type of linguistic difficulty or obfuscation that like tries to bury your high meaning from the naive public. ?I find this very compelling. I think the other sort of like, suggestion I'll make or that the way I've been trying to think about these things together is that like there is they're just like is a certain queerness that's baked into James's conception of art and maybe you could, if you want it to be like, irresponsible, maybe, say, like modernist art more broadly, where these stories, like even as these stories are like obsessed with secrets, I think they're ultimately more obsessed with these, like communities that form around, these, like, kind of dysfunctional greater and lesser degree communities that form around the secret. So in Beast in the jungle, you have May and Marcher, who who are both kind of like, see the secret they're keeping as like a way of distinguishing them from everybody else in society, but it's also that gives them the feeling of like superiority and purpose, but also it's like tangled up in all these like ugly like relationships with each other. ?And I think in figuring the carpet, like again, the thing that I find most fascinating about the story is like that it's actually more interested in these weird communities that form around the secret, these weird literary communities that are forming around for her secret, rather than actually like trying to do the literary work of discovering the secret. So and there are ways in which, like totally these communities are extremely like messy and dysfunctional and like they're like there's a lot of jealousy and betrayal and all of these sort of high affect dynamics that characterize them. But I think what we're seeing is this kind of imbrication of kind of like this attempt to understand or fathom like a queer reading, like a queer literary community, basically, as it ex exists or something. ?But these are all very interesting things to talk about. Did I, when I was making all those points, were there was there anything we haven't touched on at all and all of those things?. Yeah, we've covered it. ?Yeah. Um We have yeah, there's still a lot of stuff we could talk about. We have like four minutes left, so I don't know how much we're actually going to be able to do. ?We could talk about like what Mae is doing and Beast in the jgle. She was kind of like an enigmatic figure. Maybe we don't even need to dig back in. ?Are there any like kind of broad conceptual questions we should talk about with Henry James? Did anybody like does anybody like Henry James? I didn't like Henry James until I was like in my late 20s. ?So I wouldn't begrudge anybody for not liking his work. But Amy did not like him. Look at Amy likes him of us. ?I don't like him, but I appreciate he like, he tries to make things difficult. Yeah. And he likes leaving gaps. ?Yeah. I find it quite, like, as a student, I enjoy when things are difficult because then there's more meat for you to chew on when you're writing your about something but as a reader it's quite annoying that he is like a sister feels like Max problems. Yeah. rather than like. ?It's what he wants. It's very chometric like Marco at his point. It's like a very geometric way of writing. ?Oh, yeah. But I also think that having studied it, it makes it richer and I could then go and read it a second time and enjoy it so. So maybe in my late 20s, I will enjoy it. ?Ooh. Yeah. That's turn from now.. ?Did you guys have to read any of this other books before? No. That's interesting. ?He's kind of like ambiguously Britishish. It's always interesting to me who claims. He'd die in England. ?Yes. Yeah., he immrated.. Oh, yeah, you rented those, too. ?I haven't read them, but portrayed a lady I'm familiar with it. Yeah. Yeah, interesting. interesting. ?They're very, like, those are long.. Portrait of ladies, long turn of the screw is quite short. Okay. ?I think the short ones are are fun and not necessarily that hard. Like Daisy Miller, not that hard. Yeah. ?Portra of the Lady is long, but is a total of like to read. Is it really, really good? Because I's not very good reviews, it's very good. ?It's really good. Okay. This Well, I can't really recreationally read anything. but yeah. ?On, I really wish you've sent us our um. Oh, yeah a question. Just logistically. ?In other colleges people are getting term reports? Yes, you guys should be getting term reports. I don't know how you access access them when you will be getting that. ?Oh. You would have filled in some stuff. Yeah, I filled in a form It's like school? ?Yeah. Oh, those are pigs. Can you get here. ?Yeah. And it says by your satisfaction or not. I don't even think I used to those designations. ?I just You did like a paragraph of feedback. Oh, great. Where would we, because I have no idea what.. ?I think they, I can ask. Could you, the administ? I'm so intrigued. ?Sorry, yeah, they're going. Are you going to explain, like, the holiday work? Yeah, yeah, no. ?We're going to do that in seminar. Yeah, okay. And it turns out, like, you don't really need to do any. ?So, like, there's a, like, Laura Ash is referring to like an essay everybody had to write, but that's just like your first tutorial essay basically. So that's not like, you can work on it over break if you're like desperate to, but you can also just write it during week's year of. Oh my. ?The week zero is collections week. There's also collections. And so that's the collections, it's like, they don't matter. ?The collections aren't really matter, but they're just like practice, it's just like practicing, making you sit there. And also there're three. There are Three says Lauren told me that. ?No. I was like, if it were up to me, I was maybe going to do zero because I was like, you guys need to think less about these exams. Do you be prepare for them. ?You can or you don't. Like, there's, there's no, like, nothing happens. We don't I just have to read them. ?Yes. So we call. No, well, but you could like review things we've been working. ?Right, okay. Yeah. So we. ?So it's hot. It's three hours. It's three hours. ?And it's by hand, too. It's not. What? ?I don't even know how I'm supposed to read it. Laura's like, tell this person it's a three hour examividigulated if I'm pronouncing that word correctly. Why isn't she school? ?Oh my gosh. I hate. I haven't essay. ?I't even know, like, how do you know how many words written? No, exactly. I don't want to read everybody's handwriting. ?This is just. You won't be able to. My in Trialis. ?Yeah. So anyway.. Wait, but that's not fair. ?You? Yeah, tightly. Can we get tight? ?Okay, I'll ask. It'sologies. Yeah. ?And that's our way exam. Yeah, yeah. So three hours and in three hours we must write three, three. ?Three, yeah. An hour on each. I don't know if you have to. ?I don't know if there's like a, if they say at some point, like, gotta move on to the next one. I do. Because when you're doing a levels, if you have to write sometimes two or three essays, I had to write two three essays in my history one, and it was two hours and 15 minutes. ?They don't tell you, you just have to look at the club. Yeah, you have to talk. I eat threes three hours for mine.. ?Yeah, so you guys are really done this. No, it's. But it's not. ?That was like four years ago. Yeah, yeah. I've That's so long ago. ?Well, you guys will be fine. This is everything. Christmas is them. ?But it'll be good. It'll be good practice. And written. ?Are you kidding? if I can get the handwriting. Because I'm sure now one else is doing. ?They're all actual down. What? No. ?No. They're not. So. ?I don't know a lot of actions like it has to be this way because this is how they've done it in the past and like next year you can do it differently. But have to Laura, she thinks she's bad because she was on TV. Oh. ?Relax. No, I love her. I'm she's taught by her. ?Thank you so much. tomorrow's Is it tomorrow? No. Thursday. ?What would be as food? I' one? Yeah, yeah yeah. ?But like tomorrow we the next. Okay, after I've never. Okay, okay, yeah. ?Thank you. See you later.. You' collection. ?No. Heaven in my. Yeah. ?It's tough. You guys see, what, D levels like last year? Last year. ?This year? have you correct? I'. ?Amy No Shakir I. Oh, the go. Sorry, bye, guys. Where are you going? ?You guys can go? I. Where are you going?? It's happening. ?I'll go first, yeah. Bye. Okay, bye bye Where are you going? ?I need. Oh. All right. ?I need to work. Wow. I started to find. ?First all of I No, all of my Like, This is. Aisha, Hi. Bye. ?Bye. Oh. Sorry, Missix. ?Hello. Are you collecting stuff? Mm hmm. ?Hello.? Hi. Oh. ?Pictures. Yeah.... My collections, I release. ?I just found out that my collections are like headwritten. Oh, yeah, But my exam is. So I'm not sure why it's's anything., that's right. ?Right, I'm not going to finish classes at all. I type faster. Yeah, because I haven't for four years.. ?Yeah, no, I've been serving in the army, you. Yeah. Can they, like, respect my. ?Your? Yeah, my past a little bit more. bit more. Look at you, Look at us buying the cheapest for those. ?Hmm? I am a lot of things for one thing, I'm not