packed on the literature itself so very long way of saying there's a lot there's a blur in between a lot of these methods. The other thing I'll say is that I think the sociology sociology of literature is in many respects the most sort of blurry of the methods, and this is mainly why I encourage everybody to read that James English article where he, like it's calledwhere in Nowhere. Like the point of his essay is to say, sociological methods have been sort of like internalized like across literary studies as a discipline. ?So like basically everybody is interested in some degree in the relationship between literature and like the social or literature and society. So it's like everywhere, but then at the time he was writing, he was like, but nobody actively says they work on literary sociology. Now a lot of people say they work on literary sociology. ?So it's like kind of everywhere and everywhere now, not everywhere, nowhere. But so that's all of that is a long way of saying, redoing literary sociology here. Like, it makes sense that this will, like this essA also sounds a lot like potentially like some of the polit I mean, we're only going to talk about one strictly political method this week in class, but in those extra readings, I tried to gesture towards other kind of forms of political interpretive modes there are that exist out there. ?So this could, you know, you, methodologically could fall into what she's doing here can fall into like different methological camps. What else to say about this? Like, how did people think Rhea? ?And this is going to be more of like, we're going to talk about the actual document itself more than we normally do, like, I think normally during tutorials for paper three, I'm like, let's use the paper to like begin a discussion about whatever we're reading that week and not and I don't feel like we need to focus that directly on the actual piece of writing, but maybe this week we will, just because we have time. What do Amy and Isaac and even Maria, herself think of like the success of applying these methods to the Rosetti poem itself. I could have been a bit more nuance about it because I think I kind of speak about women like as a whole I couldn't break one version about D into like class and stuff that I also like, I feel like I had a lot more things to say that I didn't. ?Like, I wanted to bring in like the trope of the fallen woman woman and stuff like that because there was a rise of prostitution where I was writing and she actually worked with a lot of women who had followed prostitution. So I feel like I could have been a bit more like detailed in my reference to, like, society, like bit towards society. And I also think like, a bit about radical feminism, like kind of shholding, and I could have been like a bit more specific. ?Yeah, yeah, Amy or Isaac grew have any thoughts about this? I guess second question to me is, I mean, the first thing I should say is like, this is kind of, in many respects, a dumb exercise because there's no way you could do it adequately in 750 words. There's just like no way you could have actually like apply a method to a literary object in this limited amount of time. ?I was trying to be generous and not make you guys do the thousand words, but even the thousand words, I think it's like kind of a stupid exercise. Like that's also really short. I guess like one thing that I was thinking about as I was reading it is like, if you're going to try to specify what makes this a literary sociological reading and not one of these sort of like adjacent or overlapping methods, that you could, that like, well, one thing, and I think this is basically true of everybody's, is like, I basically felt everybody didn't spend enough time on the theory or the scholarship. ?So, like, in the exam itself, and I'm going to talk to somebody this week about, like, what the role is of the, like, like, you're allowed to bring in primary sources and we'll have, I think I'll have more to say about this as we talk about other people's essays. But like, you're allowed to bring in primary sources, but it still seems to me in general they want you operating on a more methodological terrain, although I'm not positive about that. Like I don't say that with any certainty. ?Mostly, I think you just have like a lot of freedom to do what you want in this paper. And you shouldn't feel too like, you shouldn't feel like there's some sort of like general formula. You need to just follow to do what well on this particular exam. ?But that said, I do think you want to demonstrate a certain level of fluency with the scholarship or the theory. And so, I think in part that would mean quoting from people who do literary sociology to like, see how they're conceptualizing literary sociology, and to me, like that the thing about the essay that struck me as most sort of literary sociological is the emphasis on, like, the institutions that that like structure or like condition literary literary production. And so like, yeah, like, the institution of marriage, which I think shows up late in the essay or like the institution of gender. ?Like you can like one of this kind of stupid things about thatary sociology is like you could describe anything, basically as an inst the institution of the table, the institution. What are tables like? How have they changed over time? ?Everything sort of becomes an institution, but that, like, the institution, as a framework is sort of what makes it literary, sociological, and it felt like you're reading could have done like done more by focusing on, like instead of thinking, again, if you're talking about gender as an institution, yeah, you're going to like talk about these big broad things. But if you're going to talk about like, I want to think through about like how the institution of marriage is like shaping what's going on in this poem. I forget, is that the institution you brought up, maybe I'm confusing this. ?I think I did. Yeah.. There's definitely in. ?I feel I. Yeah, you said you mentioned an institution of American marriage. And so, like, focusing, I mean, like, I think that first body paragraph, or the second body paragraph on, like, the structure and how that the structure of the poement and how that mirors like the the structure, like how these Victorian social institutions like structured and conditioned, like women's behavior, like, I think that stuff, I think that's great. And then it's like when you moved more broadly, like to the symbol of the apple, you're like, well, what, like does this have to do? ?I mean, it does like undoubtedly there's a way to bring that back to institutions, but it's like making sure you're operating in that paradigm the whole time.? Yeah, yeah. I couldn't figure out this paper whether we' supposed to take like the source and then prove for the methodology from the source or like the other way around and like take the framework and then use like text to back it up. ?Yeah, and maybe let's do this use this as an opportunity to transition to your paper. I mean, do you want to talk about it and I'll say more about your that question in a second, but do you want to just talk about how you negotiated that in your essay? Yeah, well, I would over work out. ?I couldn't really figure out what, like, if which way around to do it. Yeah, I' basically talked about yeah, I think I could have done sociological for mine as well, but I thought it was interesting that it was a non-fiction piece that was talking about why you would write fiction and then so then from that I went, oh, you could do the intertirement of history and literature and then so I did nasaurricism. And basically he argues basically the tech security within an innate purpose, and I thought the nosaurus would say that that says something about that point in history and necessity literature why they needed it during the postwar era and I also thought you could tie it into the fact that he did a lot of protests writing and that it became a fall or became a method of reform to him and not simply like a piece of art. and then make that to the fact there was social and political, unrests. ?I also touched on how the text is synonymous of its context because he talks about his six spirits as a writer and also society, but more broadly. Yeah. Yeah. ?Yeah, so remind me of the two ways you asked in your original question. So one would be, yeah, explain yeah. I couldn't figure out if you take the framework of the methodology, like new histoan and then like insert texts to be like, this is an example of this okay yeah or take a text and then go this proves the way that new historicists would read. ?Yeah, yeah. Do you, Rhea or Isaac have like an opinion of him? I guess I should just say what? ?Yeah, I guess I should just say. This isn't really a question. So.. ?So I think. I'm going to start I'm going to say a lot of I statements right now because I think I'm on the first ground on that territory. So I would say to me, and again, we're kind of operating here. ?There's the exam and then there's what I'm telling you, and there's some overlap between these things, but there's there's no, there's no perfect overlap. So to me, and this is sort of like bracketing the exam for the moment, to me, the most powerful sort of like use of theory in scholarly or critical writing is is basically, it's like, it'sed, it's like kind of self consciously adopting a theoretical tradition to sort of like interpret a work of literature and not but and that makes it sound very unidirectional, but ideally there's this kind of like mutually enriching process that goes that goes on when you put the method and the object, like, in conversation with each other. And I say that, like, I guess, yeah, and now I'm gonna, like, qualify my saying that. ?I think for your purposes, for your writing, that's how you should envision it. So like, you should like, by doing a new historicist reading of Orwell, you should like gain a greater appreciation of Orwell and his embeddedness and history, but you can also learn something new about new historicism from this encounter between the two. And I think, like, and so to me, what's one of the most fascinating things about this essay is that, I mean, I think what you, if I'm interpreting what you did correctly in this essay, Amy, you're like, basically showing how Orwell is sort of into historicist already. ?Like, he's already not invested in the distinction. Like, the new historicists who are responding to like, the new critics and like, yeah, let's say the new critics who like, kind of wanted when you read literature to like bracket authors, bracket historical context, and just see how the beauty and harmony of of this poem, this lyric poem, by like how it's structured and like, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. And so the new historic sister is saying, well, we want to see how like we want to see the just like the continuity between the literary attic and everything that's around it. ?And so, like to me, when you stage an encounter between Orwell, the methods of new historicism, like one of the things we're learning about, new historicism is like this alternative, that there are other genealogies that you could construct for new historicism that actually, there are people who are who are thinking productively across the Bamger between art and history before, like, even in that like that introduction that we read where they're trying to construct this history, they're like this lineage or this tradition that they're coming out of. They don't mention Orwell or like, you could even say, I feel like, like a lot of artists in the ths and 40s who were modernists, but then when the world collapsed during all these economic depressions, all these world wars, they like, they divested themselves of the idea that, like, art and life or art and history were separated from each other. So, like, I think that's a really interesting thing that comes out of this out of your essay, Amy, but then I'm also thinking, but I also feel like for the purposes of the exercise, that's not what you need to do. ?Like you would or like, it's not what you have to do. I think it's an interesting way of doing it, but like, one of the things about these methods is you could do them on anything. Like, you can, yeah. ?I was worried what I was doing it because I was like, he's basically just saying what new histois would say. And I was like, I don't think because the point of new and like to take something unusual and then say, oh, this this links to history because of this. I thought, this isn't like unusual. ?Yeah, yeah, totally. And that's like what their whole thing was being like, you wouldn't think that this thing was deeply like was deeply embedded its historical moment. I mean, the reason like, I probably should have done this exercise after next week because I basically think it, I mean, it's kind of impossible to do any of these in 750 words, but like New Histo is, it would be like to me, the New Historius move would be to be orwell next to like other historical materials at the time. ?And it's like, you're not going to do, you don't have time or like the interest, frankly, probably. And like, doing that extra research for the purposes of this essay, so I appreciate that you being totally appreciate the effort, and what you did was not wrong, and I just like explaining why I knew the story system was like, uniquely challenging for this sort of exercise. And so yeah, like to me, if you were going to do a new historicis version of this, you'd talk about other people at the same historical moment as orwell, who were like also not interested in erecting boundaries between art and history. ?And so you would sit, it would be to say, like, oh, for Orwell, there's clearly, like this kind of like joy and fascination with, like breaking down the barriers between art and life and he, it's kind of like a kind of revolutionary gesture, but it would actually, it would show that it was actually a very sort of comment at the time. There's nothing remarkable about him. Um. ?Yeah, any other yeah, yeah, Amy, Ra, anything questions you have, thoughts about Amy's essay life, did anything occur to you while reading Amy's essay or any questions about this exercise come up for you? I was just gonna say, I feel like, I wasn't entirely sure like, how much when we would do this exercise, how much like closer you need to inbed into like ir actual work because like I mean the way the word is I did two paragraphs of like fks they were actual words from the power but like I wasn't entirely sure if that was like, right. Yeah. ?Yeah, do either you just have questions about it? That was my entire paragraph two paragraphs to you. Yeah. ?But I think for aestheticism, the entire point is close reading but my question really was like about like whether we need to trace the developments of the specific method and technique as well because for aestheticism there are like competing claims about what aestheticism is yeah so I was confused as to how to like deal with that or whether we even need to deal with that or just say like I'm just you going to use this method and acknowledge that there are other methods as well. Yeah, I think it's like even in the exam itself, it's a thousand words like, and granted, you don't have like texts there to close read exactly, but I don't think, like my senses during the exam, you would it would be like, yeah, I mean, I'm trying not to step on any of that. I'm like, I don't want to give you any of the practice exam questions that you might find useful in the future. ?So I'm just like holding those back a little bit. But I think just maybe to, like the version of this that you're imagining, Isaac is like, you get a question, you get a prompt that's like, Joseph North says, historic says contextual methods are bad. And that aesthetics is good. ?Discuss. And I think, in your discussion,'s one of the always says discuss, it's like, you're not really having a discussion, you're just writing something. But discuss is what it always says. ?And I think in that instance, what you would say is something like, like, I don't think you would reconstruct, you definitely wouldn't need to reconstruct the whole lineage, but like, I think you would you could, I think it would be powerful. It would be powerful one to kind of of construct the lineage that Joseph North is sort of imagines for himself. So for, like, I think ideally you would say something like,W Joseph North is calling for a return to, like, aesthetic education at a moment when he believes aesthetic education was sort of what the aesthetic was sort of demystified under historicism and contextualism. as kind of an ideological suspect, and you could even say, like, the new hist historicist contextualists themselves would be mystifying the aesthetic from what it had been under new criticism, which for Joseph North is like. ?It was just aesthetic judgment and like ranking ranking, blah, blah, blah. So you could provide that history that he does and even that I think like you wouldn't absolutely need to do, but I do think that would be would be powerful. And then also, again, it would, it's not necessary, but it could potentially be powerful to acknowledge different strains of like that aesthetic history, but I don't think you I don't you need to. ?I mean, to return quickly to the question of close reing. Like, I also think I would have a capacious understanding of what close reading is, and I would actually encourage all of you to like, and because you can, you know, this is a takeh once, you can actually look at the texts. So maybe some of the stuff I had already said doesn't actually apply. ?But like, I think I would encourage you all to like close read the theory scholarship in addition to the prim to the primary source, or not the primary, like the literary object. And again, like it's unclear to me whether you actually need a literary object, and we still haven't, I feel like Amy's original question is. It's it's like interesting for a lot of different reasons, but I kind of seems to me they want you to treat the dreary objects in this exam. ?This is talking from the perspective of the exam. It seems like they want you to treat the literary object as almost like its own theorist. you could use like if they were like art and life, if the thing was like some some obscure person you've ever heard of saying, like, art and history must never meet, discuss. I think in that case, Amy would write this new historicism essay and like half of it would be about like, oh, the new historicists sought to break down the barriers between art and history, like, somebody like, and I don't know exactly how you'd work this transition, but then you could bring up Orwell and be like, Georgeorge Orwell and his nonfiction prose also was deeply invested in breaking down this boundary. ?And I think that sort of how they would imagine it were. So like, in that case, it's less like you're applying a method to an object and you're just sort of like using the object as like another way of like, think of like this, like the literature itself thinks about the relationship between art and history or like whatever they, yeah, you. Could you do that with like a fiction piece as well? ?Definitely. Yeah. Definitely. ?You could do it with anything. Yeah, like it would be.. Yeah, I mean, it's honestly, I mean, again, this is like, and now we're back to, like, Morgan saying things that have nothing to do with the exam that are probably going to be more confusing. ?But this is like an interesting to me philosophical or theoretical approach that like literary scholars and theorists are always invested in like finding their own theory in the thing they're writing about, but there's no like, like they, you know, they want to find in the novel they're reading. Like if they're doing the new aesthetic approach, they like want to find like the novel itself thinking about the role of art and aesthetic education and like aesthetic experience. itself and that's a very common scholarly move. But there's no necess necessary reason these things would actually need to be like self-conscious about that stuff. ?Anyway, that's such like Morgan pontificating. Yeah, I feel it'sails to say.. But yeah, I think, like, maybe, and this is just to reiterate the point we' already made to Rita, it's like, you're gonna want to do a lot with the actual scholarship or theory. ?And also for like, next week's tutorial for one B. But like, I think, yeah, I would just like encourage everybody to do more more engagement with this the scholarly stuff. Any other question or thoughts? I mean, yeah, so one question I had and this is, like, on the technical essay writing. response, did you do shorter paragrap? ?I was wondering about the short paragraph. I did. Okay. ?I feel like these paragraphs are too short.. No, it's my fault. I mean, it's.compensated. ?Yeah, no, no. I've definitely appreciate the. I definitely was like, I's going short. ?I love it. And I think, yeah, I was just trying to think of like what, I mean, one thing I'll say is I don't believe in general rule. I don't like believe there are ironclad rules in writing. ?I think everything. It's just, like, I think to me, learning to write is about internalizing your audience's expectations, so you know how to like manipulate your audience. You know what they're expecting, and you know how to like, you know how to how to kind of fulfill and satisfy their expectations, but you also know how to like surprise and do interesting things. ?That to me is like what learning to write is all about. And I was like, well, what I think so I offered these sort of like generalizations, not in the spirit of like Iclad principles, but just like, I think basically the rule of thumb is paragraphs should be between half a page and one page double spaced. And although I'm like, it occurs to me right now, as I'm saying that, that like, you guys work with A4 pages, and I, my whole life work have worked on a different size of page, so I actually don't know if those map onto each other. ?And in fact, I've never seen a four size paper, like with text on it. Wait, what do you use? No, no, no, it's letter. ?It's. It's a completely different. It's the same week, but like. ?It's a letter or something. Yeah, my pages are smaller than your pages. You It's, yeah. ?Oh. Yeah, yeah. It's like, where are any of you in the group? ?Oh, yeah, Isaac was in the group that taught me that clue. Like, what I would call clue in the United States, the board game is Clo. These are big cultural.. ?I don't That's refreshing. Well, fine, yeah. It's more fun It's more fun. ?That's true.. Yeah, so anyway. I'm saying, so now I'm going to adjust my like paragraph recommendations as between like maybe a little less than half and a little less than a full page. ?That to me is like a normal size paragraph. And I think the point of the paragraph is like.. you want to like, have the first sentence that like says what the like point of your paragraph is that this is so open. And Amy, I'm just doing this because you did something experimental and interesting, and this isn't targeted at Amy, because I've voiced my displeasure with paragraph length from everybody. ?So yeah, like, you have your point, you introduce evidence to support that point, and then you like, explain the significance of that evidence and how it kind of demonstrates your point. And then you move on to the next paragraph. And I think the like, impulse that I'm pushing against is a desire to have, like many points or like, many different pieces of evidence in the same paragraph. ?But yeah. One that I need my short paragraphs. I was like when I first started reading, I was like, is Amy?" ?I was like, " is there a formatting problem?" And then I was like, is Amy doing short paragraphs as like, as like to kind of spite me to be like, I'll give you short paragraphs. Yeah. ?So even if it were to spite me, I still appreciate it. No. Yeah, I'm trying to think. ?Is there anything else that, like, yeah, any other question? I mean, maybe, okay, we'll go on into Isaacs and then we'll have like their we can kind of continue to do, like a freefor-all. So, yeah, Isaac, do you want to tell us about your exercise here? ?I barely touched on Gary. My entire essay was just applying North's ecaticism to Galatia, which is a short story, but the reason why I chose aestheticism was because for new historiricism we had the potato essay and for sociology there was this Mexican the second reading a secondary reading, but I really couldn't find any example on aestheticism other than the CN nai and I did not understand that secondary reading at all. So I just wanted an example essay for myself to understand what aestheticism was and I was really confused as to the jump between diagnostic to therapeutic cause I felt like at first when I was trying to prove therapeutic, I fell into sociology cause I was looking for a reception and like how to to sort of prove the therapeutic because I feel like when I'm just doing this aesthetic analysis, all I'm doing is just saying that this might possibly lead to this, but I'm not saying anything concrete so at first I tried to look for reception, but then I felt like that would be a sociologies moved so I just removed it from my essay and left it like this. ?So that's why it's just a pure aestheticism essay.. Yeah. To Rhea or Amy have any thoughts about like whether that would be a violation, like whether movie perception would be a violation of like aheticist method. ?I don't even know if that's how they would say it. Like aesthetics methods or anyway. Also, like, what would, yeah, like, yeah, like, what would the aesthetics method look like? ?And did you either of you like even consider doing the aesthetics? Yeah, why not? Oh, I find it like, well, your essays were really interesting, but I find assessism kind of boring. a theory. ?I love it. I love it. I love the theory the most. ?Yeah, that's interesting. I'm kind of interested in one critic in the history that's why I was naturally more drawn to be others like asicism and reading, I didn't really consider that much. Like I really looked at like my umcrafts from the 70s about how like I wasn't involved Yeah, I interested in it personally. ?Yeah. It's interesting. I mean, like one thing I would say is that I think like I could I don't. ?One thing, okay, so the first thing I'll say is that, and I said this already, is that the distinctions between these methods are ironclad. Like, we're going to do, like, I mean, honestly, the most incoherent we is this week on the political because there is no, I don't think anybody would self- identify with it. Like, no literary scholar, like self- identify someone who like, does politically. ?I mean, maybe they would. They would say, I do political methods, but I think that I think that sort of like posture, I don't even think they would describe it as a method. I would just I think they would just say, my work as political, like is politically charged or invested. ?So that's why this week is incoherent. It also is like there's so many different kinds of political ways of reading and so many meaningful methodological differences between all these different versions. So, but that also just like holds true for every week. ?Like there's just like blurring that's going on all over the place. Joe Nord's aesthetics are deeply politically invested. very explicitly. So I don't think going to reception would be that bad. ?And in fact, when he describes the IA. Richard stuff in the book, like I Richards famously is like giving students poems without the titles and telling them to write about them. And then like that's, and like, that's how he does his initial kind of diagnostic work. ?So that's like a reception, that's a reception. itself. I mean, honestly, this would be a kind of interesting paper to do, like an interesting way to approach this paper, or maybe not this paper, but like an interesting way to approach a particular kind of writing or even like the exam would be to talk about like Joseph North has this theory of aesthetic education that has this kind of diagnostic part of it where he believes literary works can like reveal through like, through students's aesthetic reactions or aesthetic responses can tell us something about society. And that you could like put back to dialogue with like reader responsor. ?I don't know. There's like interesting stuff you could do with that in in the context of an exam essay. And then you get to the therapeutic question that you have, which is very, like one of the reasons I wanted to bring in that other passage to class when we did the aesthetic Week was like, I do think that stuff is, like, pretty vague and not work. ?Like it's unclear what it would mean to. But I find I found what you did here very convincing. Like, I do feel like that's why That's what he would want us to do. ?I wasn't impressed with that Gary, the therapeutic part of the theory, as I was writing it when I was reading I was quite like wow actually aesthetic education is important but as I was trying to put it into writing, I realized like it's really not that convincing at all. Yeah. I mean, I feel our conversation, you guys remember the conversation we had that at the end of that class where we were like, just like, what would it mean to do aesthetic education? ?Like, do you would you need to do aesthetic education on literary works that are like, good? Or not like good in the sex sense that they're aesthetically good, but just like have good politics that you agree with or like, or yeah, anyway, do you remember that conversation anyway? That was like one where I liked Joseph North doesn't explain this at all. ?Like, you could read, I mean, I think the example I tried it at one point was like, white man's burden or it's like, you could do an aesthetic education with white man's burden where you're like, is doesn't the white man have all these burdens? Like, isn't this really convincing you that white man is like burdened with the project of empire? But so it's like, I think this is kind of returning us to the Amy, like the conversation about Amy's, the wormol stuff, where it's like, to do this aesthetic stuff, which you need an object, like, this is what Isaac does, like, do you need a story that self consciously dramatizes like, the aesthetic experience and how people process the world or could you do the aesthetic, what would it mean to do an aesthetic reading on like a literary objectject that's like not at all interested in aesthetics? ?Although is that possible? Do you have anybody have any interest or any thought, not even interesting thoughts, but straight thoughts about any of this? Maybe Isaac has to say something because I trust that you thought more about the aesthetic rehs than Amy or Rhea. ?Like, what does it mean to do anything? Like, could you have done an aesthetic Could you have done this Trio North reading on I tried to think about like having fun and doing it on the potato again but there's really nothing because the entire point like the entire basis that Joan off like Joseph North talks about for aestheticism is close reading so no matter what I feel like it has to be a literary text and then I grappled with trying to do it on like, for example, like the nutrition labels for example, like how like the the numbers sort of like pop up at you and then like the bunch of numbers again like slows down perception slow you're forced to pay attention and then I realised like no meaning I could like get out no meaning unless I forced something out of it at all. So like it was also the reason why I ended up choosing Galatia, which is like the most aesthetic like text you can think of because I feel like for aestheticism it has to be an aesthetic text because it has to have sort of like meaning that you can get out of it and you have to feel something from reading the text in order to get an aesthetic education out of it because if you don't feel anything from reading it then I'm not so sure how aestheticism like pops up from there yeah Could there I like, could you read or like, yeah, a work of literature without, like, is there a work of literature that doesn't produce any feeling at all? ?Or or any aesthetic experience? I batteries from the, I'm not read something, I'm not be affected by asshole, whereas like okay, you might read something, think like, this is like, yeah. and wouldn't Joseph North say that you then, the task is that you're supposed to like do the therapy? You're supposed to do the therapy to get like, so let's say, I'm the I am a teacher. ?I'm Joseph North and I'm teaching the literature class. And I had to read like the sad ending of like, what's that World War I novel that's written by a German? All Quiet on the Western Front. ?And that ends with like the main guy dying. Sorry to run the book. But like, and you all read it in class and you were like, I felt nothing. ?Like, like, would it be then the job? I mean, and again, I don't know. I mean, I don't know anything about all Quiet on the Western Front. ?Maybe it's like as bad politics, but like, would it be then the job of Joseph North to then say like, I'm going to kind of get you guys to feel the sadness of this moment and to understand that human life, all human life has like value and purpose. that I think I think that's what the point of the therapy is, and it just seems a little silly to me, but but I kind of think that's what he's telling you to do. Right. Do you like train new sensibilityilities and ways of feeling. ?Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. ?Yeah, yeah, it's interesting. So, yeah. And when you read the CNI, so that was just like kind of a comprehensible. ?It's really hard. I took it as sort of like aimino space between like aesthetic education because she talks about interesting which is like a tier below like being like literary value and also like a tier above being like having no literary value at all and then playing with that level of like judgment there. And I feel like I also Number one, I didn't understand it, but number two, I felt like if I thought about it in that way, I still didn't feel very convinced for aestheticism because I feel like we are always just playing in between like certain things and like with subjectivity that and I feel like it's always like trying to force something in rather than, for example, for like new historicism and sociology, I feel like there's like no forcing at all. ?Like you can like really pull apart like certain threats of like a connection there, but for staticism is really just saying like even if you don't feel this way, I think that the that education here is that you should feel this way because the clothes reading says does this to this. Yeah. So I wasn't entirely convinced. ?The only one I was sort of like convinced by was the judgment inequality one. But I felt like argument that you but also I don't really remember. It's sort of like how we need to bring back aesthetic judgment because in like taking because at the start a lot of the criticism for like aestheticism was like we are doing is like judging and then like leading to like the canon wars and then he's saying that by taking it away is we are sort of like flattening like literary value but we need to bring it back so that there's sort of like literary value added back into the text that we are reading, something like that. ?Yeah, but I felt like that was more less on the method of aestheticism, but more on like the repercussions of aesthet of the aesthetic method. So I felt like it still didn't really like like deal with the aesthetic method in a sense. Yeah, so like just to rehearse all this again to like just because I might help and Amy. ?So like the argument this scholar, Michael Kloon makes in that essay, I forget, it's like it's called like aesthetic Judgment or something. And his argument is, so like Joseph North really doesn't think aesthetic education involves like learning to distinguish between like good works and bad works. Like, he's he doesn't even want to like rank things. ?He doesn't want to come up with canons. That's not what aesthetic education is for Joseph North. And he says, like, actually, that impulse to, like enshrine certain works and say, these are the great works and those other ones are really bad, is like a sign that like how the new critics got it all wrong. ?Like for him, the new critics in their investment in, like, celebrating certain works and denigrating to others, like that, that is just like a bad. It was like a bad habit and and uh, yeah, it was just like a bad impulse that the New Predicts had. And so he doesn't want to do an aesthetic judgment, and so Michael Kloon then writes this essay, and then eventually he turns it into a whole book that you can read it. ?Anyone of you can read it if you're interested in claiming that actually the impulse to say that there are no good works of literature, that everything is sort of subjective and you can choose whatever's good and you can choose and Amy can choose whatever's good and Maria can choose whatever's good and Isaac can choose whatever is good, that that's kind of of a piece with a certain like, what he would describe as like neooliberal, what you could also describe as a certain sort of like market version of what's of like aesthetic value, where it's like, well, whatever people like is what's good, and nobody should force their beliefs about what's good and bad on others. And so for him, coming back, like, actually taste has this important political function of it's not just like, taste is not just like wealthy people oppressing poor people, which is how that guy here poor do you understand, like, his book Distinction, which was on the reading list, is all about how aesthetic judgment is just like class politics. Michael Kloune would say, like, actually to fight back in this current moment of neoliberalism, we need like taste, like, we need to kind of like rebrace taste as a way of like installing our own values against, like, this kind of market latic where everybody can just like whatever they want. ?Um Yeah, and I agree that it's sort of like clear to know like it's clear to know what to do with an argument like that. Like it's clearly that you can write essays about like why you're thing is good. But it also just like kind of turns scholars into like book reviewers. ?And like, um And so it almost seems like and also my like my thing about all this is like literary scholars aren't really trained to be to like defend their aesthetic judgments or to make aesthetic judgments. So whenever you ask, like people like me to defend the things they like, I'm always, like, super wishy bushy about it because I like, like it and I think it's good and I have contempt for what other people think is good, that isn't good, but then also I don't really care enough to or like feel compelled enough to defend what I think is good. So anyway, this is the sort of mess we find ourselves in. ?Yeah, all right. So this is like, I think this is a helpful conversation just to like continue to immerse ourselves in some of these controversies. And I do think like, of the weeks that I'm pretty confident, I still like methods that I'm pretty confident, you'll be able to write about on the and say I'm like, I'm not certain, but I feel like writing about aesthetic taste and aesthetic judgment and aesthetic education, I feel like that that's a question of like undoubtedly will or not undoubtedly, but I feel like there's a pretty high likelihood that you would be able to write about that in the exam, or at least the last few years they've had questions that are sort of about this. ?Yeah. Is it like, and what's the Victorian paper we get like a bunch of questions and people? Yeah, so you're gonna get like, I forget how many it's like 20. ?I'm gonna, I think literally next week I'm going to take like the 2019 exam and just circulate it and just say like, right. Maybe I'll do that today then because you guys like having a lot of time and there's no reason I can't do it right now. So, yeah, I'll send it to you. ?Maybe I'll send it to you tonight, and I'll just say like, right, I'll do 750 again, because that seems like a humane number of words. And and you can just respond to one of the exam questions. But like a lot of the exam questions I feel like, I mean, I think there's so many exam questions for paper 1B because one, I think 1B is taught so differently across everywhere in the university that they're like, I get stressed out looking at those exam questions because I'm like, we didn't talk about, like, this is a question about like literary formalism. ?Like we didn't talk at all about literary formalism. And but, you know, three of 30 colleges will have talked about it. So like, they get like, they'll have that. ?So there's so many questions because so many people do so many different methods and organizing so differently. So anyway, I look at the 20 questions and I'm like, God, like, we've only talked about like four or five of these, but I think that's the way it's sort of supposed to work. Also, the lectures, presumably, have given you like, background and like, an indication of stuff you could write about for this paper. ?I don't know if you agree with that. Or if you feel that to be the case. The point there you go they don't delve in like methods. ?So, yeah, do they just talk about like big issues or like how to read poetry how to how to read punctuationctuation. Yeah, meter.of. Context. ?Yeah. Would be beneficial for us to like re-around other types of criticism or is it better to just like delve into the ones that we've done? So did I think I sent around, I think delving into the ones we've done is helpful and I sent around that Terry Eagleton book literary Theory and Introduction. ?I think that would be very helpful to even. And then they're like, I can recommend some short essays that if you want to treat like Bart Rin Bart's death of an author is like Although apparently the read of like the readers on this exam, like hate how often students write about death of the author. So I'll send it a wrap, but then you'll just feel like you, you know it, early that you have it, at least. ?Yeah, any other over kind of been like the witching hour of the tutorial, like any questions or concerns about the exam. Like, and I do think, like, I think it's like, fairly likely you could get a question about like context, like the point of like, it'll be like a quote, like, the point of literary analysis is historical context, to discuss. Or like, is to like, is to like explain the importance of history, like their question, there are like weird questions like that. ?You'll see when I circulate the old exams. Yeah. I mean. eachS say like how many texts do you bring up? ?That's sort of has been a mystery to me across all the exams. I think like the fewer the better probably. Like, I don't think it's impressive to, like sight a lot. ?Like, I think they want you, I think what impresses readers on the exam is kind of command of details that you presumably shouldn't have. I mean, for paper three, it's slide, you don't have any of these texts, so it's really impressive if you can talk in great detail about a text for memory, I guess would be, you'll just have it all these texts that you're disposal. So I think they want kind of deep substantive engagement. ?Another straight thought that I had while I was reading all the essays is that I felt this round of tutorial essays was at its weakest when you all were making kind of abstract statements about methods. And there's a reason you everybody's up there worse than it's because it's like very hard to in ay eloquent way, like summari or like, yeah, like encapsulate one of these methods. So I would just say, like, please feel free to just like, quote these people more. ?Like, don't feel like it's a burden, like, don't feel like it's incumbent upon you out of nothing to just like, describe or encapsulate the theory of Bethod, just like, say, like, for your first sentence in the whole in the whole essay, just say like, Joseph North describes, like, ahetic education in these terms. Like. Kherine Gallagher, Stephen Greenblatt, are reluctant to define new historicism, but when they try to, here's what they say, there is their ambition. ?And don't worry, especially for the purposes of these tutorial assays. I'm curious if this is true if the examin itself. I don't I'm not even going to say it, because I don't want to mess up how people are approaching the exam. ?But I feel like everybody can always get into the meat of their essays faster. And in part of just like for my own reading, I'm like, I don't really need a dut to full and responsible introduction for all the essays. I'm just like, get to the cool, like to the cool, interesting insights you're trying to to demonstrate. ?But anyway, I'm not sure that's true of the exam. Is it annoying when I say things like that? I'm trying to make you. ?So I'll also narrate, I also explain to you I'll narrate something from my perspective, which is like coming from the U.S where they're like, where one, when students major in a discipline, they like are taking a lot of classes across the university already and even while they're majoring in a particular discipline and then when they go through their major, they're like taking classes with like a lot of different people. So I feel a tremendous pressure as like the one person functionally this year that you're like learning. I mean, you're obviously with rowing too, but like, that's like old English. ?It's like its own thing. I feel like very responsible for like teaching everybody like how to read literature. And I also want you all to do well in the exam and feel good about the exam. ?So I'm torn in directions of just like, I want to like, do my own thing, but I also want you to feel good about the exam. So that's why I'm waffling the way. But it's all going to be fine. ?Everybody I talk to in the faculty is like the prelim exam literally doesn't matter for anything. Like nothing, it doesn't affect like how you graduate. It's like, it hasn't, yeah, and so it's just like kind of a meaningless exam. ?So everybody's like, why are you worried about that? I'm like, anyway. here I am. Can I ask you my final question? ?Yeah. It doesn't need to be your final. Sorry. something that we don't know, like, we don't know what we think about it, because I actually don't know what I would say like, I don't know if I'd agree with aesthetic judgment or not. ?Yeah. Do we just like make an argument and just run with it and do ev? Yeah. ?Don't like, okay. Sorry. I think there's ways of doing interesting kind of complex responses to these things, but it's probably more straightforward to just to just be like, you could just say like, you could just offload your feelings onto like, Joseph N. ?Like you could be like, yeah, I don't know exactly what.. I think it'll be helpful when we look at the actual exam prompts and then like work through them and that's what we're going to do next week. Yeah, I can have that question. ?It was just how much of the people should be our own interpretation and like judgment of like the text. I think it's impressive when it's like a lot of your own, but also.. So far, example both we were doing it of these like what's like like what would our own judgment be like? ?Like, I don't agree with this because I feel like yeah, yeah. It's interesting. So we're also going to in Trinity. ?We're going to read, there are a lot of every year they release what's called an Examiners Report, which is like all the people who did the paper, who read paperaper three exams, like sit down and they say, well, here's what the good exams did. Here's what like the decent exams did and here's what like, the week exams did. And they produce like a page long report that's like that says like, here's what the strong exams did. ?And we're gonna just like read through that together in Trinity, which I think will help, like tailor your the way you're, you're responding to these things. Yeah. Lovely. ?I also think you could can have access to those examiner's reports already. if you want to find them. Okay, so. We also have access to the exam people. ?Yeah. It's on so low. It's on. ?Yeah. You go, you look at, you search on solo, you know, the thing that the like drop menu next to the search thing and you do search exams and then you search like literature 1830, 1910 or like intrad, I forget what Moby is called. Yeah. ?Introduction to English language and literature. And then he says language, but all the papers are under the paper to questions. I suggest you don't look at them. ?They're tough.. Good to see you guys. We'll continue to. ?We'll continue to worry about all of this as failed. Play golf. Yeah. ?Okay, so I'll see you Thursday, I think. Yes. Is that right? ?We're gonna see each other so much this week. Thank you. Thank you. ?Thank you all. Get your. Oh, yeah. ?Yes. Bye. What you. ?You right. stupid thing. No, I don't anymore.. Happy birthday. ?I think before we see the need something, only way. No, he doesn't. Oh, I mean, I was looking at it while writing this. ?Which is why I wrote a full long to him asking him about.. He doesn't. And, yeah.. ?Itits really. I heard that exam noise report also it doesn't help. Yeah. ?So I'm like not sure. a thing of trial and error. Yeah. Except you only have two dau for this paper. ?So our trial is only because next term we are doing language. I Right. I think it would be useful. ?I don't. For paper 3, I'm happy. For people one, I feel like let's start getting grades once we know how to write the paper. ?But I feel like Right. But I feel like he also doesn't really know how to grade. Yeah, I was Also, I was gonna ask reading Hillary. ?Yeah, lots of'. I kind of want to, like, g order my stuff. Right. ?I'll send it. Let's get a list of questions down in the English. I send them to the group chat. ?Yeah, yeah. Oh, I forgot that. That's bad. ?That's fine. Because I keep meaning asking then. I don't know if it's like, too soon if he's going to be like. ?No, he't Gu, I'm so sorry. I need to pee. Oh, no, I will go over this. ?Then never mind is fine if I'm going to Palc toilet. What? Because it's there. ?Yeah, it's. I'm going on I'm guessing you'll have the same thing you must be such a long. So you could at least use the flight. ?Yeah, you could do your reading. Oh, I'm not planning to. Okay. ?No, because I have so many flights back and for, so it doesn't really matter. Oh, okay. I rather just rest. ?Yeah, that's. Yeah. Yeah. ?I feel like I just feel like. No, I agree. Yeah. ?I mean, I asked him about, what did I ask him about him really early about prelims or something. Right. And he said And like he was like, oh no, it's fine. ?But like I asked way too early. He just I hope he's gonna start saying I work earlier because of what he said about, like, how we' like having agents to do work enough time. Yeah. ?Like the Rowans had a bit of a chat. Yeah, that's what I'm thinking. Oh, yes. ?I kind of confirm the middle mpt. I don't I'm actually dreading it week. Why? ?Oh. To be fair Oh, will he be a? We don't have a one B. It'll just group. ?So we literally have two seminars in one. That is really good. So, like, that is really good. ?But yeah, yeah. That was a cute, guys. Was it? ?Where's Tutorial my life? I'm still a bit clueless, but. Completely clueless. ?Yeah. I still have no idea what's going on. I've never been more confused after a tutorial. ?I thought it was interesting that we have to use more of the like theory.. But I mean, it's an introduction to literature course. But But I just. ?Like, when you read the questions, it's like later, which is you, both of you will do. Like, no Sayructure pops into my head that can answer the question. I'm gonna have a look at. ?It's a good moment. Oh. Maria. ?Taft, ta, ta. Yeah, yeah, yeah, bye. Bye. ?Amazing, amazing tutorial. One of these be.