[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
Hello? Hello, everyone. Can you hear me? Okay. This is the first time that we are all lecturing in this building, so, uh.

So welcome. Um, welcome to Oxford. We really hope that you are enjoying your first few days here.

And we are very much looking forward to getting to know you, um, over the next three years.

So as you start thinking and writing about 19th century literature, this taster session is meant to give you just a flavour for what you might expect.

The ideas and texts that you might encounter and the questions that you might ask.

It's a complicated, jam packed, immensely rich period of literary history.

Each of us will take you through one of the major literary forms prose, particularly the novel, drama and poetry.

My name is Ushashi Dasgupta. I'm based at Pembroke College and I'm here to talk about fiction.

I'm going to focus on two case studies, and we'll see sort of what sort of things that they might open up for us.

So let's start in the tiny one room apartment of a now do well and the unfortunately or

ingeniously named Dick swivel a he's a character in Charles Dickens is The Old Curiosity Shop,

which was published from 1840 to 1841.

By a pleasant fiction. His single chamber was always mentioned in the plural number.

Mr. swivel never failed to speak of it, as his rooms, his lodgings, or his chambers, conveying to his hearers a notion of indefinite space,

and leaving their imaginations to wander through long suites of lofty, lofty halls at pleasure.

In this flight of fantasy. Mr. Swindler was assisted by a deceptive piece of furniture, in reality a bedstead,

but in semblance a bookcase which occupied a prominent situation in his chamber.

There is no doubt that by day, Mr. Swindler firmly believed that this secret convenience to be a bookcase and nothing more,

that he closed his eyes to the bed, resolutely denied the existence of the blankets, and spurned the bolster from his thoughts.

Implicit faith in the deception was the first article of his creed.

To be the friend of swivel, you must repose a blind belief in the bookcase.

So basically, um, those swivel are only has a shabby little room to his name.

He always talks about that room in the plural. Dickens calls it his plural fiction, and it just makes him sound grander.

He perpetuates a harmless lie, a pleasant fiction.

He seems to believe it himself. He sleeps in a torn up bed.

A piece of multipurpose furniture that can transform into a bookcase.

Um. You see from the picture, um, that Dickens,

whose illustrator Fitz was maybe not quite sure what this kind of piece of furniture was actually meant to look like.

Um, during the day. Swivel insists that it is a bookcase, not a bed, pretending to be a bookcase or something.

That can be two things at once. So what is going on here?

This is a scene about the essence of fiction.

Dickens is showing us that people make their own fictions every day and all the time, whether they realise it or not.

What are these pleasant or plural fictions for?

To make an otherwise difficult life bearable, perhaps. And in a century where injustice and inequality are intensifying and becoming more visible,

the imagination suddenly um, starts to perform an important social and psychological function.

Dickens gives us a universe that is brimming with stories and with many kinds of story spinner,

chatty gossips, delusional fantasists who are basically like novelists even if they don't put pen to paper.

These characters are invested with, um. What is what?

What's something that Dickens calls the romantic side of familiar things?

But as it turns out, people did put pen to paper.

One critic estimates that there were 60,000 novels published during this period.

By 7000 individual novelists. Rates of literacy grew, and there was a strong culture of communal reading aloud.

You could say that the Victorians had a collective belief in the bookcase.

The 19th century created the novel, at least as we recognise it now.

But if we dig deeper, we quickly realise that the form was, and is much more slippery than it might seem.

It was a form under construction. Its aesthetic and ideological work were very much up in the air.

And that's why it's so exciting to think about 19th century fiction.

It feels so alive, so full of risk, so reflexive about its own parameters and possibilities.

For one thing, we have divided today's session into three separate parts,

but the lines between prose and drama or prose and poetry weren't always that defined.

So let's go back to the Old Curiosity Shop.

Much of this novels structure and tone, and many of its literary strategies and characters, are totally indebted to the world of theatre.

Um, Dickens loved the theatre, and he's always testing whether he can collapse the barrier between stage and page.

Um. So Little Nell and her grandfather encounter a band of Punch and Judy players.

And here's the quote. It was not difficult to divine that they were of a class of itinerant showmen.

Exhibitors of the freaks of punch. For perched cross-legged upon a tombstone, behind them was a figure of that hero himself.

Perhaps his imperturbable character was never more strikingly developed.

For he preserved his usual equable smile,

notwithstanding that his body was dangling in a most uncomfortable position, all loose and limp and shapeless,

while his long peaked cap, unequally balanced against his exceedingly slight legs, threatened every instant to bring him toppling down.

And so you can see that really weird juxtaposition here between the graveyard and the comic puppet show.

So in other words, prose and drama have a reciprocal relationship in this period, and they very much keep each other on their toes.

Now we might have a copy of something like The Old Curiosity Shop on our own bookcases.

You might have unpacked your paper three texts as you moved into your colleges this week.

They look formidable. Um, they are hefty, serious, nicely packaged, permanent.

But this doesn't reflect Dickens's experience of writing his novel or the Victorian experience of reading it for the first time.

It was published in a short lived literary weekly magazine called Master Humphrey's Clock, which Dickens created and very largely wrote by himself.

The Old Curiosity Shop, um started life as a short piece, which then awkwardly morphed into a novel.

Once Dickens realised that that's what the public really wanted. There's a frame narrative that really doesn't make much sense.

Um, and it completely disrupts the coherence of the plot.

Um, we begin with this first person narrator who then disappears and is forced back again, uh, towards the end.

And the whole thing has two extremely distinct storylines, um, which, uh, these distinct atmospheres, which again,

disrupt our sense of cohesion, this slice of literary history reminds us how contingent novels were.

They kind of happened by accident. So what does it mean to believe in the bookcase?

Where did novel sit in relation to the broader contexts out of which they emerged?

Were they vehicles for social change or for critique?

Were they complicit in the dominant ideologies of the time?

Who and what were novels about? Who and what were novels for?

If you asked George Eliot, the answer would be clear by writing fiction about ordinary lives.

Fiction that was attentive to everyday detail and as true to real experiences as her imagination would allow.

She hoped to stimulate a reader's sympathy for the people around them.

A picture of human life, such as a great artist can give surprises,

even the trivial and the selfish into that attention to what is apart from themselves, which may be called the raw material of moral sentiment.

So the novel, in other words, has an ethics. That's what she's saying.

But if you ask someone like James Fitz James Stephen, a reviewer,

barrister and soon to be colonial administrator in India, the answer was somewhat different.

Stephen Stephen had a very serious problem with Dickens.

The business of professional writers of light literature is to amuse the public.

There's no harm in being a pastry cook.

If he happened to make his fortune by his creme tarts, a sensible person would feel the impropriety of immediately preceding to scarif.

So that means to cut or to criticise the Lord Chief Justice in gilt gingerbread caricatures.

Um, Steven is basically saying that pastry cooks and novelists like Dickens shouldn't talk about politics or about social problems,

that this isn't their job or their place. And he was, I might add, um, a snob.

We might recognise how deeply invested Dickens's novels are in questions of societal change.

But critics have reminded us that Victorian novels are also full of charged silences,

and they make assumptions about what is central and peripheral in the world.

So take this moment at the end of The Pickwick Papers, Dickens's first novel.

It is a summing up. Dickens is telling us what happens to all of the characters in the future.

Mr. Bob Sawyer having previously passed through the Gazette.

So that means that he's gone bankrupt. I'm passed over to Bengal, accompanied by Mr. Benjamin Allen.

Both gentlemen having received surgical appointments from the East India Company.

They each had the yellow fever 14 times and then resolved to try a little abstinence.

Um, so actually, like when they're in Britain, they just drink too much. They're now trying a little abstinence, since which period?

They have been doing well. So this is the end of the novel, right?

As England splits the surgeons out, the geographical reach of the novel suddenly expands.

For Dickens, the Bengal Presidency is a convenient, vague monkey.

Elsewhere, Bob and Ben are out of sight, out of mind, and serving imperial interests.

So it's 1864. Dickens's final complete novel, Our Mutual Friend, comes out in serial parts from May.

His son Walter has recently died in Calcutta, his heart failing at the age of 22.

So he's an officer in the British Army in Bengal. And boom Kim, just about he starts to release a novel in a magazine called The Indian Field.

We now recognise Raj Mohan's wife, this novel as the first Anglophone novel published in India.

So I'm going to be giving a lecture on this novel in week two.

And this is just a very, very short preview of the sorts of questions that Raj Mohan's wife raises.

Roger Mount's wife is fascinating given its first ness.

We ask it to bear a lot of ideological weight, to offer an uncomplicated critique of the imperial machinery under which it was created.

The novel doesn't give us that. Instead, its aesthetic form and political ambiguity, its very existence.

Tell us something about the way that that machinery worked. Ranch man's wife was born.

Kim's first novel and the only novel that he ever wrote in English.

He went on to become one of India's pre-eminent novelists in Bangla.

Rasmussen's wife is intriguingly disjointed in tone,

a mishmash of genres that elbow each other out of the way at various points and that seem to have moved across borders.

We find both realist description and melodramatic set pieces, plot points from sensation fiction, gothic tropes, and a detached and ironic narrator.

Um, rather like the kind that you get in Thackeray.

So some of you may be reading Vanity Fair, um, this term, and it's really striking to compare these two writers uses of voice.

This tonal and generic variety tells us something about what Kim read as a colonial subject in Bengal,

and it also suggests what happens when a writer tries to fit Bengali stories into British literary frameworks.

At the same time, though, Bong Kim is clearly drawing upon Vaishnava traditions,

Sanskrit poetry, and bringing them into contact with these imported or imposed forms.

For a writer born into empire, the act of writing in English carries huge political and personal weight.

It says something here about Bowen Kim's class, caste and gender, his education and profession,

and the forms of cultural and linguistic imperialism that were brought to bear upon 19th century Bengal.

Boon came. As I say, he never wrote in English again, and one of his letters explains his decision.

And this is these really striking times.

He says, we ought to dis anglicised ourselves, so to speak, to a certain extent, and to speak to the masses in their own language.

There was a scene in Raj Mohan's Wife that captures these tensions so perfectly.

So this. I'm just talking about a character called Madhav. He's a quadriplegic, which means, uh, that he is a Bengali gentleman and an Anglophile.

Some 2 or 3 English books were scattered on the couch, and one of these must have held in his hand, but he hardly read it.

He sat with his abstracted gaze fixed on the dark but star sprinkled heavens which were visible through the open windows.

So mother owns British books. We don't know if they're novels.

Um, which means that he sets some store by them.

They have considerable purchase in a particular pocket.

I think only society. But motive is distracted.

He is too preoccupied, too fixated on the view from his window.

The here and now to get transported by his books to another imagined place.

He chooses not to read or to partially read. What does it mean when Kim asks to hardly read?

Roger Mohan's wife may tell us something about the way the novel moved through space in the 19th century,

but it also suggests that the novel was a co-created form, something that had its own unruly life in the colonies.

To believe in the bookcase. In other words, and to use Dickens's phrase again, is to sit in a complex, ever shifting relation to the wider world.

Thank you very much. Sorry.

Sorry not to have a competition with a novel, but theatre is available to the illiterate as well as the literate.

And it's cross class. Everything from two penny seats in the gallery to Queen Victoria, who was an incredibly keen theatre goer.

So she saw, for example, Briscoes, The Corsican Brothers six times.

Um, and some of the sketches we've got of the costumes are from Queen Victoria's Child um, useful sketches, which in a Royal Connection collection.

So it's mass entertainment. Um, on one night in 1866, it was estimated that 40,000 people went to the theatre that night alone.

And that's before the massive expansion of theatres and the last few decades of the 19th century.

As transport increases and the population of London increases, something like 30 to 40,000 new plays were written in the course of the 19th century.

And then added to that are all the revivals of old plays on top of that.

And it's an enormous variety of different kinds of theatre.

As Tracy Davis and Peter Holland titled their study of 19th century Theatre,

it was quite the performing century, and its theatre is absolutely essential to understanding the 19th century.

It's like trying to understand the 20th and 21st century without screens, without television or cinema or phones or social media or any of that.

Theatre is absolutely essential to the 19th century imagination, exactly as the show's, she said.

It seeps into Eliot's, Dickens's, Thackeray's, everybody else's sort of sensibility and imagination.

It's an intrinsic part of public politics, um, public and private life.

So amateur theatricals are also incredibly important, um, and wide and pervasive.

And one of the things you'll find in a lot of critical studies of the 19th century is the idea of anti theatricality,

the notion that everybody was suspicious of theatre and saw it as morally corrupting.

And so, um, actually, if you went back to now and read newspaper articles, there would be a similar view of photos and videos and all of that.

So anti theatricality is in many ways the suspicion of something that's so pervasive and so powerful.

It's an attempt to push back on it.

And in the same way, you could say that's where another of the pervasive kind of critical frameworks you find around 19th century theatre,

which is the actresses prostitute.

Well, name me an area in which women become incredibly powerful, where the sexual dubious ness is not thrown at them.

So if you look at the 19th century, theatre is the place where women earn the highest incomes, where women can earn just as much as men.

It's a forum in which women become incredibly powerful.

Not every woman, but some women. So, for example, Madame Festus in her 1839 to 1840 season as actress manager of the theatre,

she was in control of a company of 684 employees that included nearly 200 supernumerary.

That's their dean for extras, um 116 people working in the wardrobe, 199 carpenters,

which gives you an idea of the kind of spectacular effects that they were achieving.

Um, and 80 act actors all on the payroll.

Um, and in the case of Lily Langtry, who goes from being a mistress of, um, Edward the Seventh.

Yes. To, um, becoming an actress, um,

she found touring in America selling sufficiently and luxurious that she bought her own train carriage so she could travel around America in luxury.

That's the kind of power that some women were achieving in the theatre.

And again, I think it's a reason for some of the kind of critical suspicion and push back on theatre was exactly that,

the way in which it was so powerful and.

If this is your primary image, if somebody says the word melodrama,

it's worth knowing that the original of that bit of business comes from Augustine's play Under the Gaslight,

in which snow, a one armed male Army veteran,

is the one tied up on the railway tracks, while the heroine Laura, uses an axe,

which you can see her just dropping there to hack her way out of a railway shed and rescue him from the lines just as the train arrives.

Um, so don't assume some kind of cliched gender relations within 19th century theatre.

It's often anything but now. 19th century theatre was brilliant, subtle, diverse, complex.

Its also enormous resources could go into it.

So, for example, in Charles King's production 1857 production of Richard the Second.

A literal parade of 250 people are part of Bowling Brook's entry into London.

So similarly, if you're used to the RCA whatever doing Birnam Wood coming to Dunsinane and Macbeth with kind of three twigs,

actually, they could have 3 or 400 extras. So it really is a wood.

Moving across the stage, um, and similarly, towards the end of the century,

Ben Hur, when that was staged, it had real horses on stage, on conveyor belt.

So the galloping towards the audience as part of the stage spectacle, so that almost no limits to it,

which asks really interesting questions about the relation between the literal and metaphorical on stage.

And I'll come back to that. Think about that.

The way in which metaphor works when you're in some way seeing it literally on stage, but it's not actually literal, and it stretches.

19th century theatre stretches from these kind of huge spectaculars through to the small,

culturally elite audiences that gathered for, for example, early performances of Ibsen.

Um, or Absolute Extreme, the earliest productions of W.B. Yeats, his plays, which were literally sort of ten people in a drawing room.

So there's the full range of theatre happening in that sense throughout the 19th century.

Now, really importantly, when you read a lot of 19th century plays, they can look incredibly crude.

And that's because you're just seeing the script and you have to think about the script in the same way

that if you studied some of the most important and influential and skilful films of the 20th century,

if you were doing so from nothing but a script, they could look screwed and simplistic.

Anything but. So what you need to do is use your imaginations, read around production details,

and then bring performance itself in as part of your understanding and reading of those plays.

So, for example, a lot of 19th century plays are incredibly visual.

They have a huge emphasis on the visible world with questions then,

given the allusions involved in empirical evidence and how you trust your senses and what your senses mean.

But there's also a kind of literalism of the metaphor.

There's a way in which. So if you think of ghosts, if you think of monsters, if you think of hauntings and spirits,

there are all sorts of ways in which psychology is externalised on the stage.

And you want to think about those visual and externalised details as ways of representing interiors.

And so one of the most successful and famous plays of the 19th century, um, Leopold Lewis's The Monk,

has tableaus and action playing the kind of Henry Irving plays the main character

who's committed a murder and is haunted by a kind of PTSD recurrence to it,

which are then played out in that. So what it means to be seeing somebody's state of mind played out on stage.

There's a lot of kind of psychological complexity potentially within that together with stage of play.

So this was a famous 1862. Pepper's ghost is invented, which is it's basically a hologram effect,

so that by projecting light onto the figure below the stage and then putting it through plate glass, it produced a ghostly hologram effect on stage.

Um, which is still used in some of the most spectacular theatre you can see in London now.

Um, it's an incredibly effective bit of clever stage trickery that goes back to that date.

Um, and don't think of the theatre as outmoded or old fashioned.

It was absolutely technically cutting edge. So as soon as you developed a technology, playwrights were thinking about how to use it.

So, for example, in his 1859 play The Octoroon, a camera becomes a crucial part of the the sort of dramaturgy of the play.

It's how the villain gets discovered is through, uh, the his image on a photographic plate or in Bernard Shaw's Man and Superman in 1903.

There's a car on stage at the end of the act, drives off stage.

That's 1903. So the count in a tiny that's in the court theatre.

So the kind of, um, pushing technology to its absolute furthest edge is constantly done within theatre,

and it's a forum for showcasing that and asking questions about what that means to live with that technology, what that means for us as human beings.

Another thing to think about and aspects of performance is affect.

So melodramas, right. You've been referred to as a machine for effects, for generating feeling.

And that feeling doesn't necessarily get simply solved or resolved with the plot.

So, for example, in Douglas Gerald's um, 1829 play Black-Eyed Susan, the sailor hero is.

Court martialled for the fact that his commanding officer, while drunk, attempted to rape Um William's wife,

and when William fought off the commanding officer, he fought his commanding officer and is therefore condemned to die for defending his wife.

And you get the whole of the last act. Is him kind of preparing to be hung with a noose hanging there.

The fact that in the very last seconds of the play, a reprieve comes through,

because it turns out that he got his discharge just before the fight happened.

Doesn't cancel out the feeling that is generated before that moment.

So think about that relation between plot mechanism and effect.

It's often used very complexly, and often the apparently conservative framework of the plot enables,

um, some very, very strongly subversive or confrontational dynamics within it.

And it's worth remembering that theatre is the most tightly censored genre of the 19th century.

It's the medium that the authorities are most worried about controlling.

Similarly, um, Lady Audley Secret when that stage,

the villainess becomes the heroine who defies everything that she's busy pushing first

husbands down wells and setting light to buildings and doing all sorts of wicked things.

She announces to the audience that she will never surrender, and it will be victory or death,

and the kind of effect that that generates the kind of energy having her aroused the power of the place.

Rather like think about, um, Shakespeare's Rich the third, and the way that the dynamics work when you have the villainous hero.

Um, and again, performance, think about the ways that say towards the end of the century,

Wilde's plays and some Shaw's plays are looking at being in society as a form of performance, the ways in which,

um, whether it's self-creation and The Importance of Being Earnest,

or whether it's the rules of society reduced to a form of acting, the ways that performance plays into that, and Wilde uses that.

So in his curtain speech, the importance of um for Lady Windermere's Fan,

he turns to the audience and compliments them on the intelligence of their performance.

Um, and the newspapers and critics were outraged by what he'd done there,

or think famously about Ibsen's A doll's House and the way that Nora performs

her tarantella simultaneously to kind of seduce and distract her husband,

but also as a kind of performance of herself, a performance of her inner state, and the impossibility in A doll's house of separating.

What is Nora's performance of self for her husband, and what might be her true or inner self, or some such concept even exists?

And that's one of the ways that 19th century theatre engages with questions of gender.

So if you if you've engaged already with Judith Butler's theories of gender as a form of performativity,

there's a sense in which 19th century theatre is there nearly 100 years earlier, dealing with a lot of those ideas and using them.

And that's the reason that for the suffragettes, for the suffragists,

theatre becomes hugely important as a forum for challenging some of those notions of what it is to become a woman rather than being a woman.

The whole ways in which, um, gender is performed for a larger audience.

So just to end. This way in which performance relates with questions of the real, that thing between the literal and the metaphorical,

between what you're seeing and what you're meant to be imagining. Don Bosco, in his play about slavery, The Octoroon, or Life in Louisiana.

In that play, Zoe, who we say over here, um, who's one eighth black?

Um, at different points, the play offs, all sorts of questions about what is the reality of race.

So a point when she reveals to George, the white man who's in love with her, that she is one eighth black,

she points to a blue colour in the colour of her eyes and in her fingernails,

something that even in the most expensive closest seats to the stage, you ain't seeing.

So you are imagining and projecting. And Zoe was first played by Agnes Robertson, an entirely an entirely white, famous Scottish actress.

So that was the audience knew she was nothing but white, but being asked to imagine her as black.

And then in the course of the play, because of all sorts of complicated things to do with debts and mortgages and the dating of documents,

it turns out that she's not a freed black woman, but actually still enslaved because her free papers were signed when her father was still in debt.

So they don't stand.

So the randomness of what changes a human being into property is both in the audience's imagination and in the convenience of economics.

And alongside Zoe, there were a lot of black characters in the play, all of whom were played by white blacked up actors,

and one of whom as the kind of lead, um, Uncle Pete, who's kind of the main spokesperson for a lot of the slaves on the plantation.

He code switches constantly. As soon as a white character is there, he starts talking in a very different voice and register.

So put all of those together and basically was asking all sorts of questions about what is the reality of race.

Does it exist in any way? How does it relate to performance?

How does it relate to a myth constructed to facilitate the selling, the trading in human beings?

So there you can read the text and not necessarily notice.

You need to think about all those things of how things have been represented against the idea of them,

and the fact that the reality of theatre is always actors, stage, costume, audience,

and the way, just as with metafiction referring to its own narrative or its own words on the page,

just so, theatre is often using that incredibly present sense of power and immediacy.

So enjoy it. Yes.

Okay, so I'm going to talk about poetry and hopefully give you a flavour of the richness and the variety of poems produced in this period.

The dazzling array of themes and concerns that poets absorbed from the wider culture and helped shape in particular directions.

And I want to lay particular stress on that process of shaping and crafting,

because if there's one thing that the most rewarding poets of the 19th century had in common,

and that commands our attention today, it's their commitment to experiment and innovation.

It's a pushing language towards new expressive possibilities, the way that a sequence of words, a pattern of signs and sounds,

cannot just represent our thoughts and feelings to ourselves and to each other, but can help us discover what we really feel and truly mean.

Open us to new sources of pleasure and reflection.

Tical concentrate and expand our minds.

Poetry's minute attentiveness to the way words resonate.

Can generate speech where an accents change gives each the other soul.

In the words of Robert Browning's Sotelo. Like the Italian troubadour, a poet whose fortunes he chronicled in his first major poem,

Browning sought to draw upon all the possible resources of language in pursuit of an idiom

that would strike his age in a way existing forms and patterns no longer seemed able to do.

It was the very loss, then,

of poetry's ability to speak to and for the wider culture that spurred on Browning and his contemporaries audacious experiments with syntax,

rhythm, voice and narrative. And yet, like Sotelo himself, these efforts were not always well appreciated in their own time.

So Tyler Wishfully imagines his audience as brothers, active parties to the meaning making motions of his song.

Evermore yourselves effect what I was fain before effect what I supplied.

Yourself suggest what I leave. Bear yourselves can now invest how we attain to talk as brothers.

Talk in half words. Call things by half names.

But the elliptical gestures of poetry are always fraught with risk.

That meaning will flop or misfire. What they do, then, is throw a spotlight on the ways in which our words are always at once behind and ahead of us.

As Tennyson himself noted in the spiralling poem he wrote.

Coming to terms with the sudden and premature death of his best friend.

I sometimes hold it half a sin to put in words the grief I feel for words like nature.

Half reveal and half conceal the soul within.

Words seem inadequate to the depth and complexity of the grief they seek to encompass.

By their imprecision, or by their undesirable exactness, by the density or openness of their connotations,

by the unpredictable shades of tone and feeling they evoke in us.

In circumstances such as these speech can seem to betray the very thing it seeks to honour.

Tennyson's monosyllables pick their way with nervous honesty towards conclusions they're reluctant to fully endorse.

At most, he holds it only half a sin, and only sometimes it takes a poet to register the full force of our common human disappointment in words.

But this may also be the condition for recognising the unique and indispensable power.

Because although we may not need words to feel things, we do need them.

If we want to describe those feelings or ask questions about them to help us hold on to those feelings or to start to feel differently.

As one Victorian critic puts it, Tennyson's poem is full of magnifying glasses for secret feelings and doubts and fears and hopes and trusts.

And this is abundantly true of poetry from the period more widely,

from Gerard Manley Hopkins Sonnets of Desolation to the dream haunted corridors of Dante Gabriel Rossetti's The House of life.

Poetry often beats a path into the dark places of the soul,

tapping its unique resources for thinking about love, loss, the passage of time, and the fabric of the South.

The lyric sequence, with its series of short poems bound into a wider whole,

makes suggestive use of gaps and silences to orchestrate subtle shifts of attention,

to evoke the fragility of our moments of resolution or the pang of exhaustion or sorrow.

Time frames blend and blur as no novelist or playwright would dare.

And the pragmatic tales we tell ourselves about our everyday life,

about our perfectly coherent and continuous self, our confidence in what we like and what we don't.

Our faith in appearances and our place in the world. What belongs to us and what is left us forever.

Begin to loosen.

One of the animating worries of In Memoriam is that the speaker has forever lost touch with the person he counted dearest in the world.

A metaphor literally lies in the haunting vision of a hand that can be clasped no more.

And the lurid fear that should his friend's body go down with the ship carrying his remains back to England.

Those hands, so often clasped in mine, should toss with tangle and with shells.

What that does to Tennyson's dearest friend, Arthur Hallam, is to turn him into something at once unfathomably distant and eerily present.

But thou art turned to something strange. And I have lost the links that bound thy changes here upon the ground.

No more partaker of thy change.

More disturbing, perhaps, than a person simply ceasing to exist is the thought that they go on growing and changing somewhere,

somehow, apart from us, but always a little further away than before.

The thought may be an unusual one, but it's emblematic of a wider worry,

increasingly confronted by poets in the 19th century that no one was listening.

But the philosopher John Stuart Mill. The distinctiveness of poetry lay it in the poet's utter unconsciousness of a listener,

an observation that seemed to be painfully confirmed by its loss of cultural centrality.

This was supplanted by a novel, for instance. For, while the potential readership of poetry expanded dramatically.

With rising incomes, increasing literacy, and the development of a broad literary culture,

poetry's popularity was rapidly eclipsed by that of the novel.

Near the top of many poets minds in this period, then,

was the question of whether that move to the periphery represented a loss to be regretted or redeemed,

or whether it might even have virtues of its own. In the old times, wrote Tennyson's friend Dawson Hallam in 1831.

The poetic impulse went along with the general impulse of the nation, but no longer.

Rose tinted or not. Harlem's characterisation provided a foil for what he saw as the new challenges facing the modern poet.

Confronted by a steam powered, utilitarian age of industry and scientific advance,

and by an obscure and heterogeneous audience marked by new diversity of class, education and taste,

if popularity and authority had passed to other literary forms, then was poetry destined to become,

in the words of one of William Morris's poems, The Idle Singer of an Empty Day.

Broadly speaking, very broadly speaking,

we might say there were two approaches to this problem to compete with the novel on its own territory or to promise something different altogether.

One of the most important developments in poetry in this period is the emergence of the novel in verse,

which made use of novelistic plot lines and realistic subject matter,

which aimed, in the words of one of its great pioneers, Elizabeth Barrett Browning,

to catch upon a burning lava of a song, the full veined, heaving, double breasted age.

Like contemporary novels about Browning's Aurora, Leigh set out to be intensely modern.

Crams from the times. Yet fashion something quite different from a novel or a narrative poem.

By drawing a collectively on the combined energies of many different genres.

Lyric. Epic. Romance. Monologue.

Drama. Travel. Narrative. Autobiography. Barrett Browning also sought to encompass within her narrative vital aspects of life to which the novel,

for all its capriciousness, struggled to do justice truth, God, nature, the soul.

These metaphysical topics are also thoroughly interwoven through author Hugh Close, entertainingly satirical first novel Immigrant Voyage,

whose anti-hero Claude finds himself adrift in Rome during the revolutionary events of 1849.

Klaus adopts the ancient hexameter metre of Homer. Dum dee dee dum dee dee dum dum da dee dum da dee dum dum.

And turns it towards distinctly modern ends. Each long line becoming a runway for clothes.

Endlessly wayward thoughts, second thoughts and second guessing.

As he weighs up the rival charms and vexations of religion, arts, history, politics and love among the ruins.

The other great formal innovation that vies with the novel and its own most distinguished grounds,

that of psychological perceptiveness, is the dramatic monologue.

Browning's bishop, Pablo Graham speaks for his creator when he declares our interests on the dangerous edge of things the honest thief,

the tender murderer, the superstitious atheist.

Browning's wildly miscellaneous monologues explore extremities and curiosities

of character and situation with a wild verbal energy and moral fearlessness.

The interplay of the singular voice and the implied listener makes possible an irony of moral distance,

which allows him to anatomies contemporary social and intellectual problems with extraordinary force.

Augusta Webster and Amy Leavy would further develop the resources at the monologue to explore the hidden pains of women's

domestic lives and to forge a subtle social commentary on the world in which they lived the world of Victorian Britain,

but also the world that beckoned beyond these shores through transatlantic and transcultural exchange,

and, of course, legacies of colonial conquest and settlements in the expanding British Empire.

Some of the most recent work in Victorian poetry studies has drawn special attention to these global connections,

examining the influence of Persian culture and poetry on Victorian poetics or the politics of poetry among colonial immigrant communities in Canada,

Australia and South Africa. Or how English language poetry written in India negotiated webs of affiliation

and resistance to English literary tradition that we were hearing about earlier.

What it means to be an outsider is something explored in Victorian poetry's many figures of displacement,

from Matthew Arnold's Gypsy scholar and Forsaken merman, to the sundry outcasts and wayfarers of Edward Lear's nonsense verse.

As such, poetry demonstrates, there's a kind of freedom that comes from being considered marginal, eccentric and otherwise surplus to requirements.

And so, while you find much of the poetry of the period is freighted with social and intellectual concern,

it also has a special attraction towards the gratuitous and the irresponsible, towards beauty and glee and play.

Like Christina Rossetti, begins a poem with the words I tell my secrets.

No, indeed not I perhaps someday, who knows, but not today.

It throws and blows and snows. And you're too curious why we're not drawn in by the promise of any wisdom or solutions,

but by the seductions of a mischievous and well-tuned voice who refuses to give us anything useful to take away,

gesturing instead towards the self rewarding pleasures of an active and playful imagination.

The imagination can sustain itself in the midst of hostility and indifference, that such hostility and indifference might even be galvanises.

Certain kinds of poetic expression. It's something the 19th century gives us cause to be hopeful about.

When, for example, Emily Dickinson writes, this is my letter to the world that never wrote to me.

The stark asymmetry which she describes seems to license something at once more defiant and more gracious than mere grievance.

Her words, frankness and wit convert a rebuff into a rapport.

As how inventor observes the intrinsic ability of the lyric to create intimacy is

perhaps most striking when the object of intimacy can never be humanly seen or known.

Like, say, the world, yet can be humanly addressed.

In such a case, the unseen other becomes an unseen listener.

Anchoring the voice of the poet as it issues into the otherwise vacant air.

The invisible listener, however, does not always exert a gravitational pull to safety.

The construction of an invisible you in a dress can also grant a thrilling weightlessness to lyric expression.

From far from eve and morning and yon 12 winded sky.

The stuff of life to knit me blue. Heather. Here am I now for a breath I tarry.

Nor yet disperse apart. Take my hands quick. And tell me what have you in your heart.

Speak now, and I will answer. How shall I help you? Say, air to the winds.

12 quarters. I take my endless way. This poem of a husband's reaches towards an unseen listener, on whose breath it depends to make itself heard.

The note in which it speaks is not the no of a novel or a play, a simulated time, but the no of reading.

And so what I want to leave you with is this sense of how poems draw attention to themselves as experiences,

not just descriptions or simulations of other people's experiences, but unfolding events in the here and now.

As much yours as they were their first audiences. An important aspect of this event, this is the sensory experience.

Poems offer us the way their rhythms and sounds get under the skin,

the way the pictures they paint fire our visual imaginations and can make us feel things we didn't know we were capable of.

If I read a book and it makes my whole body so cold, no fire can ever warm me.

Well, Emily Dickinson, I know that is poetry.

If I feel physically as if the top of my head were taken off, I know that is poetry.

In one of the weirdest and most wonderful poems of the century, John Henry Newman's Dream of Gerontius.

The dying speaker feels a delightful derangement to the senses,

as he's borne giddily and fearfully aloft into the ever after, surrounded by invisible choirs of angels.

And hark! I hear singing, he exclaims, but cannot of that music rightly say whether I hear or touch or taste the tones.

So I hope that's giving you a taste of some of the things poetry is capable of in this period,

and some of the things you might think about on this paper. But I hope most of all,

that the strange expressiveness of poetry will draw you ever more richly into that mutual act of creativity we call close reading,

because that's where your own originality and individuality can really start to sing.

So just looking ahead at some of the lectures available on poetry for this paper, um, I've listed some of the options on the screen there.

Uh, Hannah Sullivan is giving a four part lecture, uh, series on metre.

There's a 19th century poetry circus, which is just a fancy name for a lecture series given by multiple people.

Uh, so we've got Robert Douglas first many voices and Sophie Radcliffe on dramatic monologues and the body and sensation.

Uh, there's yours truly talking about poems inspired by works of art in the Autumn imagination series.

Michael Sullivan is talking about digital poetics and Victorian verse,

and Peter MacDonald is giving a lecture with the, uh, very alluring title I am Not a Tennyson Bot.

So stay tuned for that. Uh, so I think it's quite an appetising menu.

Do check things out, and I hope you have a great start to the term.

And I'll just say as well, uh, that I will be back here at 12:05 giving a lecture on paraphrase,

friend or foe, what's involved in putting other people's words into our own?

What does it mean to do justice to a text? What's the relationship between style and substance?

Uh, so do take a break and join me here in five six minutes time.

Thanks.

