[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
So, um. This lecture is primarily about paper, and I'm wildly I'm obsessed with this.

I'm obsessed with, uh, paper and, uh, what it means and how we can talk about it.

Um, and that's just letting you know that we'll be discussing a passage at the end, which usually makes me cry.

Um, there is a handout. So, um, some people have been sitting here a while with this note, and maybe if I managed to extract it,

if you can find it, there are a few passages that won't be on the slides that are on the handout.

Um, so yeah, it's not just about, um, paper.

These this these four lectures are really about literature and material culture.

And, uh, if that's one of my if you've been to my other lectures,

you'll notice that I kind of talk a lot about literature and philosophy and history of reading.

But another real research interest of mine is the relationship between reading and things and reading a material culture.

And so what I offer, what I hope to offer you, is some tools and resources.

If that's the kind of research that interests you.

If you're someone who's studying English but also had a yearning to also be studying history of art history, archaeology, anthropology,

that you might you go a bit wild in antique shops and junk shops and think that you might want to buy tat on eBay and trace small hidden lives.

That's that's my thing. I like this stuff. I like very human history.

Um, so I yeah, literature and material culture.

And by material culture, I mean, yeah, I mean stuff, which is why these lectures are roughly called Victorian stuff.

The it's the academic name, material culture for the things concretes, the surroundings, the objects large and small that clutter our lives.

Um, and. On the handouts.

Um, you'll find some theoretical works that might provide more explanation and ways into the study of literature and material culture.

Some of them are geared towards the 19th century,

and some of them are more more general about what it means to think about literature as a material object,

and what it means to think about material objects in relation to literature.

Um. So Victorian stuff.

I chose the title as well. Firstly because I said it relates to questions of material culture because.

But also because it captures something for me. When I was appointed quite a few years ago now to be, um, a professor of 19th century literature,

which is a title I have discarded because I didn't like it. You can get when you go for a while, you can change your change your name.

Um, but Victorian, the 19th century and Victorian stuff is something.

Capture something. I feel like when I look at books, I've s sort of divided into themes like the city and women and death and religion.

Um, it's about how I feel when I see all these issues merged together.

Um, the sea of ideas and faces and names like Ruskin and Carlyle and Matthew Arnold in the

corner and the Poor Law and the Chartists and the 1832 Reform Act of the 1833 poll,

or on the 1844 Passat tracks, and the tractor into the general strikers and the Unitarians and the Presbyterians.

And I'm thinking I'm never going to get on top of this. And I meant that this is meant to be my job, and I'm never going to I'm not going to do it.

And perhaps that might be how you feel at the beginning or in the middle.

We're now in fifth week of the paper, 1830 to 1910, because then there's a fantasy.

And what do we do then?

And it's just sort of there's no way, there's no way we can cope with all the possibilities of all this history and most things.

And, and I and I have lots of dates. So this series is intended.

It was initially written for me, for you as a kind of help, uh, for the the overwhelmed,

a sort of small polystyrene life raft in the sea of secondary reading.

Um, and it's my answer to how one can begin to find one's way back into the past.

It's by no means the only answer. Um, but how to get closer to the 19th century, or how to get the 19th century to feel closer to us?

And the answer for me, and the answer for me, has always been in my research,

in the work not to begin big with those big ideas, but to begin small and to think about what is close to us.

Sometimes. For me that means looking very closely at the text, but also I want to think very closely about very small things.

I want to show in this lecture how things that might be seen as very small and very throwaway and very unimportant.

Might help us find a way into the selves, and the stories of the past that are themselves seem to be throwaway and unimportant.

And the best description I found of this is railcar.

We may never know the actual vital contours of our own emotions, just what shapes us from without.

Because maybe if we can't get back to the 19th century, we might feel a bit more for it if we think about what shaped individuals in the 19th century.

So, as I said, a there's a list of secondary reading.

There. Um, about material culture and stuff.

But first, a bit of basic anthropology, uh, and a bit of interaction.

If you are sitting next to someone that you would like to talk to, then I'd like you to talk to them.

If you're just sitting on your own, then just talk to yourself. And I would like you to do is to look at what you have.

In your bag or your pockets. And talk about what stuff have you brought with you today?

And what does that tell you about yourself? And the times we live in.

I'm not going to go and find my back and do the same. So take a couple of minutes.

I won't make you share what's in your bag unless you want to.

Would anyone like to share any telling artefacts that that signify anything about our time and place?

I don't know,

a story about two people who randomly decided to sit next to each other on an aeroplane whiteboard and shared what was in each other's backs,

and fell in love and got married. Um. Uh, so I have not stage this back.

I did clean it out a few days ago, but not very successfully. So, I mean, in some ways,

what this bag tells you about me in terms of material culture is it tells you something about my sort of ad hoc psychological disorder.

I had not to get wet a clean sort of various as a pair of socks, um, a sort of technology, maybe.

A lot of you had leads and charges kind of speaking to. I need to be connected at all times, not run out of my.

I've got a charger, an extra charger, um, a lot of excrement, a kind of make up, a lot of kind of, uh, sentimental attachments.

I've got my daughter's old pencil case which says I believe in magic.

But also, this starts to speak to the fact that although we are meant to live in a paper this age, I'm wondering,

I don't know, it would be nice for my theory that some of you have some paper amongst you, even though you may not like.

We may think that I can see a notebook. Um, but there's some people are still still working.

We can see lots of laptops. But even if you don't have a notebook, you're not writing on paper.

Like I've got, like, a card that was in front of me for dinner with someone who's written there.

I have an old style address book, and this is this is nostalgic because this is a file of facts, the kind of creation of the 1980s.

But but for my brother, because we're quite nostalgic about this stuff.

And so but actually it's empty of paper. But I thought, um, you can see that boot's still advertised by sending the paper.

So it's quite a lot, a lot of old paper.

And you see, I can't resist the handout. This was someone else's handout I saw lying around.

I haven't read it, so. I think what you may find and maybe try and stay alert this week too, in this ostensibly paperless age.

How much paper we store has upon us. Tissues.

Cards, address books, receipts, just it everywhere.

So this lecture, as I said, I move my handbag now, um,

is about paper and it's why it's metaphorically and literally disposable, easily thrown away, but critically important.

Because it's double sided. What do I mean by this?

Why am I giving a lecture about paper rather than fireplaces?

If we're doing material culture well, because we're literary scholars,

and if we think about material culture with somewhat different from historians and archaeologists because historians,

archaeologists might be said to look directly at the object.

But we are often, if we're thinking about material culture through text or looking at what,

um, critics of material culture might call phantom objects,

the textual representation of the rag rug or the fireplace, or the chimney or the falling over the table.

We're looking at the phantom object in the text objects as they are represented in books.

But once you start thinking as a literary scholar about material history of paper, something different happens.

Because the material history paper for us is not the same as the material history of fireplaces,

because the object of representation is also that which is being represented.

So thinking about paper could be said to be a way of thinking about how literature thinks about itself.

So paper is critically important to us as scholars.

It's also critically important in the 19th century.

So why I'm giving this lecture in this series rather than say for paper one is I'm also saying it's there's a pressure on this in terms of time.

If you happen to be in Gad's Hill in 1853 and walked into Dickens's study, you would have had trouble seeing him for paper.

So here's an image of him at work. But this is a posthumous engraving, and I think the artist does tidy things up a bit,

because in that one year alone, he was working on four different publications simultaneously.

He was planning hard times. He was working on Household Words, which is the journal that he oversaw for everyone.

He was overseeing the serialisation of bleak House, and he was also working on his Child's History of England.

And in his spare time he would be working on his niche interests, which was, um, Urania Cottage, which was a home for what was known as fallen women.

He was trying to sort of reform them and offer them a way of finding a new life.

And he was interested in schools for those who are, um, deaf.

And he was interested in mesmerism, and he's writing lots of letters now.

Also, times when he got away from paper and out and about, because 1853 was also the year when Dickens started giving public readings of his work.

So. Not.

Not everyone liked these public readings. Um, they were sell-outs, but they were new things to give a novelist as public readings.

Your work. Dickens was a bit self-conscious about what people would have thought of these.

Mark Twain said he found the readings to English, which seems a bit unfair, but, um, the writer James Frith.

Jane Stanton said after going to this reading, I could not away with the pathos of Little Nell and Paul Dumpy.

I fear I have not much sympathy with paper sorrows.

So it's a really interesting phrase, this phrase paper sorrows.

The comment suggests that there's something flimsy about Dickens's productions.

And the emotion they produce. I'm going to come back to this rose paper source.

But it's also interesting because for Dickens of for many of his contemporaries, paper was not something that so easily be dismissed.

It was a subject of kind of quite. A regular conversation.

So this is Carlyle talking about the 19th century as an age not of God, but of paper.

And then on the handout, uh, I've given you a couple of things from various magazines.

There's one from the city of this, one from Household Words,

which is some someone called James Hollingshead has written a little sort of allegory called The City of Unlimited Paper,

suggesting almost it's a sort of light satire on the establishment that they are made of paper, that the city is made of paper.

Um, and then there's also a little, um, extract from something called sun magazine, which you can look up and read.

It's really not very fun. Um, it's sort of Victorian Victorian jokes, which are sort of like dad jokes, double plus 100%.

And it's all about how many things are now could be made of paper and then making jokes about what more could be made of paper.

So, um. Paper hats, paper wipes, paper houses.

Oh, how funny that this would be, because I think they had actually started to advocate paper shirt fronts to save on laundry,

that you could sort of pretend you had an you didn't want it, because having having fresh linen was incredibly important.

You can get in society if you didn't have a clean shirt front. This is big for Boswell and Johnson the century earlier.

Anyway. What does this mean when Carlisle talks about an age of paper?

It meant that there was a lot about. And I talked about this a bit when I was talking about Browning.

He was concerned that, like everything, everyone's printing everything. Why was everyone printing everything?

Well, technological developments meant the paper, which was made from recycled rags, could be made more quickly and cheaply than ever before.

So more and more began to circulate. And so you see a period, this period with a pileup of bureaucracy and red tape advertising leaflets and posters.

And proliferation of paper money. So you kind of because it's cheaper.

You could have smaller, smaller notes. Um, 19th century homes becoming equally quickly, uh, full of scrapbooks, decoupage screens,

printed wallpaper, um, they even have things called fancy shops where you could go and do crafting.

So this kind of the urge to craft was was big in the 19th century, you remember?

Um, and then of course, we have a massive interest increase in newspapers, periodicals and books.

This is the age of the copy clerk. I'm going to talk about that later.

So all the set writers in the Paris thinking, how are you going to negotiate this textual mass to sort the good from the bad?

What if you get too wrapped up in a tool? And was this new, cheaper paper substantial enough?

I mean, as a sort of metaphor, if there's only becoming a flimsy society, a papery society.

So the paper in Jane Smith's nonsense phrase is meant as a term of contempt paper rose.

To suggest that the emotion that is garnered by these fictional characters is has about as much weight as the paper they're written on paper,

something worthless. But I want to highlight the idea that paper sorrow is something worth thinking about.

It's a sorrow that might be generated from paper itself, a kind of feeling,

a sadness that might seem to derive from a culture that feels itself to be increasingly throwaway.

So to do this, I'm going to spend a little bit of time with Dickens's first great novel, The Pickwick Papers, from 1836.

It fictionally takes its life from the paper world because it's called The Pickwick Papers.

Um, it's meant to be. It's sort of frame narrative.

It's it's an edited collection of papers from a society called the Pickwick Society.

They produce academic papers. You don't need to have read the book to understand what I'm going to say.

I hope I'm really not going to be I'm going to be sort of filleting these novels for what we can find.

And then maybe you might go and read a bit if you want to.

But it's worth knowing that The Pickwick Papers very existence was an accident of the kind of print culture in which it was written,

because Dickens, it wasn't like Dickens sat down, thought, I'm going to write the great novel that will make my name, The Pickwick Papers.

He was commissioned to write stories to accompany illustrations by the star illustrator,

and then the stories became more popular than the illustrations. So it's actually its own existence.

And in some ways, Dickens's own fame was dependent on sort of an accident of periodical culture.

Robert Seymour was the illustrator. Dickens was just the sideline.

I love The Pickwick Papers. I love its messiness.

I love its contingency. Um, and I love the fact that it's a novel about a man who goes around writing about stuff.

He goes around England observing things.

And I want to argue that in this novel there is that trace of precariousness, lack of substance, a related to the question of paper contingency.

And I want to show that, like many 19th century novels.

And here's an idea that might be useful to you, even if you don't write about Pickwick Papers or Dickens,

that it's conscious the whole novel, and maybe its author is conscious of being sort of vulnerable or throwaway of paper thin.

So I want to take you that is, there's the.

A moment of bedroom farce. Mr. Pickwick ends up in the wrong bedroom.

He is staying in an inn, and he's made himself comfortable in his nightshirt and his cap, and he's climbed into the wrong bed.

And then the real occupant of the bedroom arrives, and, summoning up all his courage,

we could see Pickwick pierce through the curtains of his four poster bed.

And so the quotation. It's on the handout, but also here.

He almost fainted with horror and dismay.

Standing before the dressing glass was a middle aged lady in yellow colour papers, busily engaged in brushing what ladies call their back hair.

However, the unconscious middle aged lady came into that room. It was quite clear she contemplated remaining there for the night.

I never met with anything as awful as this, thought poor Mr. Pickwick.

The cold perspiration starting in drops upon his nightcap.

Never. This is fearful. It was quite impossible to resist the urgent desire to see what was going forward.

So out at Mr. Pickwick said again, the prospect was worse than before.

The middle aged lady had finished arranging her hair,

had carefully enveloped it in a muslin nightcap with a small slatted border, and was gazing pensively on the fire.

So that carefully paced final sentence, which ends with fire, is brilliant because it touches lightly on the Copper Lady's flammable potential.

Um, and it also reminds us that, sadly, Pickwick is not fired up by this bedroom encounter.

It's playing on that classic 19th century, uh, and classical image of a woman unfurling her locks.

But Dickens offers us the sort of domesticated producer, or a sort of Rapunzel that's past her prime.

And as the scene unfolds, Dickens can't take it.

Dickens can't resist making Pickwick make some some mental annotations.

You can see that he's he's very carefully going what ladies call it that he's he's still being the anthropologist back here.

This this quotation marks up hover around the seasoned anthropologist and a sort of pincer

like embarrassment of a man who's come face to face with a woman doing her toilette.

And meanwhile, you've got the.

The the kind of placement of phrases which are conventionally a prelude to lust, perspiration, impossible to resist urgent desire.

But they work too, on man rather than on bridle.

Our hero. So Pickwick ends the evening.

I know you've been wanting to know what's going to happen. Um, by exiting the bedroom and making do in a dark corridor.

He had no resource but to remain where he was until daylight appeared.

So after groping his way a few paces down the passage and his infinite alarm,

stumbling over several pairs of boots and doing so, Mr. Pickwick crouched into a little recess in the wall to wait for morning.

As philosophically as he might, and I think the philosophically is beautiful here.

What we've got, it's not a million miles away from one of the key philosophical dilemmas about do we exist in our minds and our bodies,

because this is a character, Pickwick, who is trying to live by his mind alone, put everything on paper.

Don't feel, think, think, think, think.

And he's be blatantly reminded that he has a body and it's played out on the play in a paper because Mr. Pickwick of The Pickwick Papers,

his entire existence is justified by the idea of paper enlightening the mind,

writing The Pickwick Papers is finding out the paper is not being thought about by the lady as a cerebral thing,

but a material thing, because it's not in the mind but on her head.

Copepods. We're going to get to those.

She's confronted by the copepod woman, and he curls up in this painfully provisional, redundant, almost foetal crouch.

Kind of an attempt to disappear. Okay. Why is he so threatened?

Why is he humiliated? Sophie, you say it because it's funny.

Um, but, um, I think it's got something to do with papers and writing.

And I also think it's got something to do with the structure of the novel as well.

As I said in these lectures, we're going to go small. We're going to go small.

So small until you're thinking, we really don't need to be thinking about something that's small at all.

But, um, we're going to think about paper.

But paper isn't small enough. We're going to go deeper in and we're going to look at colour papers,

bits of paper that are primarily gendered female and that women wrapped around their hair.

Coat papers. We're ubiquitous.

Um, I don't know if any of you have. Or have you used hair straighteners?

The ones that make your hair wave or the ones that curl? Well, the ones that wins.

But basically they were the 19th century equivalent of all of those things.

So if we did a kind of survey of how many of you have own or have used those things, then even more for curl papers.

If any of us use those, we would be called paper users because everyone use them.

Oh. They were. They work like these. This is the encyclopaedia which has sections on everything.

How to decode papers. And you end up looking like this.

This is the achieve. Look, um. Um.

And I've just read what I think is Dickens's most famous, quote, papacy.

But his novels are full of cool papers. Women wearing them.

Uh, number five on your handout is, uh, some Barnaby Rudge.

Another early novel where someone called Miggs has her nightcap knocked off in a scuffle,

and she finds herself on her knees, making a strange revelation of blue and yellow coat papers.

There are loads more. He talks about coal papers in the preface to Oliver Twist.

Often people turn up in Dickens's novels with cocoa papers.

Why did these bits of paper material culture keep popping up?

In some ways, Dickens is highlighting some.

He's making some criticism of the artificiality his perceived or his perceived view of the artificial reality of women.

Um, Dickens is kind of throw away misogyny, which, if you've read his novels, you must see sort of, um, David Copperfield, uh, talks about Dora.

He says there never were such curls.

And then later on he says, for there never were such curls as a David realises that his marriage to Dora is a disaster.

We're also we also get the implication that he says, David has woken up in the morning realising she had straight hair.

There never were such curls. What began as amazement ends in flatness.

Dickens, incidentally, was very proud of his natural knee curly hair, and as he got older, he used to curl it to make it look really good.

Um, but he had to fake it. But this idea of naturalness was very important to Dickens, though, partly as a an attack on so that Pickwick,

a woman, middle aged woman, is a nasty bit of satire and women's artificiality.

Um, partly it's a bit of Dickens putting in that feature of everyday news to give his novels that sort of realism.

Rather like later on, Joyce will have someone go to the loo. Dickens has a woman in curl papers to say, hey, look, I'm doing realism.

Um, it's also a reference to an old joke.

From the 18th century onwards, writers were quite interested in what might happen to their books, how their legacy might be used,

and there are lots of jokes in From Laurence Sterne onwards that the paper they might have written their books on might end up being used.

To be turned into something else. It's a bit like, oh, it will end up as fish and chip paper.

Oh, it will end up as code papers. It's kind of writerly equivalent of a modesty and a joke, sort of.

I'm going to joke about this because I'm. I'm so confident in myself.

So. Anyway. Oh that's right.

I was just kind of proving that in some ways, Curls Women with curls has become that sort of leitmotif for a quick signal like, this is Victorian.

You have a woman with this, uh, Jennifer Saunders in the the you they often they used to do these sort of 19th century satires.

Right. But Dickens is jokes and references to curl papers in his novels.

I don't think it's not a throwaway joke, because he actually found the idea that his works might have might be throwaway,

might end up being used as kindling, or used as coal papers.

Quite terrifying.

And that's because in order to capitalise on his fame or to make his name, he actually was the first writer to make books that were throw away.

The idea of the flimsy, serialised novel This Is Master Humphrey's Clock, which was then eventually became the Old Curiosity Shop.

The old system grew out of a series of stories, and then no story number three was the Old Curiosity Shop, and that people said, oh, we like this one.

So he turned it into a novel. But Master Humphrey's clock looks like this.

So if you go into the Western Library, can you see how thin it is?

That's it. So it's not a substantial novel.

And, um, he this was a weekly some of Dickens novels were weekly, and he had to write for the week, and he hated it.

He said he found it perplexing and difficult and perplexing is a word that suggests being sort of contorted.

I found and often felt cramped and confined. I found this form of the publication perplexing and difficult.

And we can see that the ads that you in the middle of feeding the old curiosity shop,

and then you've got an ad for Vesta stove in there, and another ad, can you see beaver bonnets down in the bottom right hand corner?

And can you see that these ads are blue and yellow?

So it's quite likely that Mix's blue and yellow colour papers were made in the very novel that Dickens was writing.

He's writing about the very novel being torn up and ads and being put on mixes, which I think is quite amazing.

And you can go into the Portland. And you can order these and you can touch them and you can feel them.

And this is where digitisation doesn't really work.

Because in order to find out I was trying to work out what could people have me call paper certificates?

I was trying to work out the paperweights because if they're too thick, you wouldn't have been able to get the heat on your happy little curls.

But, um, some people who couldn't afford paper also used rags for grouting, which is less efficient.

Um, if you want more resources to find out what these books look like, I put some on the handouts.

You can look up Project Boss and Dickens's journal online.

I think I've got some slides. Yes.

These might not look very promising at first glance, but if you click on these things, you can get things that you can see that something like,

for example, before Nicholas Nickleby, there was something called the Nickleby Advertiser, which is about 40 pages long.

Um, and it's, it's and it's, it's all the things that were sold to people who were reading Nicholas Nickleby.

And it says it's to be read on the railways. This stuff is really fascinating.

And you can settle. But I would say at some point during a time here, try and go and see some of the originals, because it's just a different feeling.

It's a different feeling. So that's one fear.

Back to Pickwick in his bedroom. Well, Pickwick not in his bedroom.

That runs through the Pickwick Papers. This sense of being part of a sea of papery superfluity.

Um. His his some more of these.

This is just to show you what you can get. From the Nicholas Nickleby.

Um, also on the handouts. I just want to highlight.

Something to say. That's a quotation I think is really interesting.

Uh, this is number six.

Uh, and six and seven, talking about the way in which writers might feel immaterial, like foam on penny beer.

I feel that there's a relationship between this question of feeling throw away and the right of feeling throw away,

and how somehow the characters in Dickens might appear.

Historically, critics have talked about Dickens's characters as being somewhat flat or lacking a certain amount of interiority.

This may be why you do like Dickens, who don't like Dickens.

Sometimes you might feel like, I want George Eliot. I want to feel more in earnest, and they feel a bit cartoony.

Um, this is Juliet John number eight on the handout.

This lack of complexity, intelligence or interiority?

Or number nine on the handouts. Um.

Dickens's characters evidence and abdication or enforced loss.

Loss of the essential or inward self.

This is just my idea, so I don't know. I don't.

I don't know whether you want to go with it, but Pickwick has stumbled into the wrong bedroom.

But I also feel at that moment it's almost as if he's stumbled into the wrong genre.

Dickens's novel is Pickwick Papers is a picaresque novel.

Dickens loved picaresque novels. He read fielding.

He read Goldsmith from the 18th century in that a character goes romps around,

maybe has an affair, maybe collects a child or two, maybe does this, maybe just that.

They don't. They don't come changed. It's not a build in.

There's no interior movement. The whole point is plop, plop plop plop plop.

Reunion. But what's happening in Pickwick Papers is he's having a confrontation with some feelings.

So he's sort of confronted with his own fitness.

You're not meant to be having a substantial, deep crisis about your masculinity in The Pickwick Papers.

He's not just in the wrong bedroom. He's in the wrong novel.

And there's no room for that kind of inwardness in that novel, or in the kind of novel that Dickens was having to produce at speed.

So that's a kind of paper, sorry. So what I'm suggesting here is that the paper series of Dickens's writing concern

a sense there is absence of room or time for inward discussion or feeling.

It's not a fault in his novels that flatness, I think, but a fault line, right?

I'm going to take these ideas. Through to.

Bleak. House. Which is a novel about papery characters.

Um. Most particularly I'm going to take.

You said in some ways, because it could be seen as a very papery novel, because it's about a long.

Investigation along. It's about a will. And how that will is being scrutinised and through Chancery.

And so lots of people are looking into papers and thinking about papers and trying to work out the history of the papers as to who should inherit.

But I'm going to take you to the most papery character for terms to snacks, be he's a stationer.

Once the stationery store. I like this because I like stationery stores.

I am usually not happy and my happiest in Romans.

And I lament the death of Paperchase, which was just wonderful.

I feel that my life is not the same as I can. Can't go and buy like different kinds of ribbon, um, on the eastern borders of Chancery Lane.

That is to say, more particularly in Cooke's Court, Custer Street.

Mr. snacks, be low stationer cease is lawful calling.

In the shade of coats coat at most times a shady place,

Mr. Snacks B has built in all sorts of blank forms of legal process, and skins and rolls of parchment and paper falls.

Brief draft. Brown, white, whitey brown, and blotting in stamps and office quills.

Pens, ink in your rubber pouch, pens, pencils, sealing wax and wafers in red tape and green.

Ferrets and pocketbooks. Almanacs, diaries and law lists and string boxes.

Rulers, expense glass and linen pen niceties, book cans and other small office cutlery.

In short, in articles too numerous to mention, ever since he was out of his time and went into partnership with Pepper.

So there's something rather sinister about Mr. Snacks.

Be. I mean, it's funny. Firstly, this is funny.

It's funny because it's so long and Swithin short and Petr is just a funny word.

But there's also something sinister I'd say is partly the tunnel shade and shady in the second sentence, which suggests that,

um, Kurtz Court is lacking in morals as well as sunlight, but the texture of the writing seems to be missing something.

And there's no absence of detail. We can see all the qualified qualifiers.

That is to say, more particularly as the narrator becomes almost crazily obsessed with particulars.

But the result is not so much to illuminate the world as to clutter it.

And Dickens is purposely creating something bewildering, a sort of writer's block.

You might say to me, what's what's I suspect about this? It's just an overloaded inventory, and it's funny.

Um. But Dickens is directing us to be wary.

And here's where I kind of his. I said we tend to look closely at things and small things, but look out for lists whenever you come to a list,

in a poem, in a novel that's just so useful in terms of thinking about what's going.

Dickens knows that there's something intoxicating about a list that narrative

interruptions because they're actually it's not moving the plot forward at all.

But they cast a spell over the readers,

and he's purposely crafted it to be almost mystical because there's a touch of the Arabian Nights to this trip to the eastern borders of.

London, um, the east eastern borders of Chancery Lane.

Um, we've got these spellbinding rhymes.

Skin's blotting ink in your rubber pins. Uh, it's going in, in, in.

So it's enchanting, but deliberately disorientating.

And that repeated assonance gives us a sense of this mind turning in on itself.

And Dickens wants us to realise that the he's like a paper pusher.

He feels like the equivalent of the dealers, paper dealers in London.

And they fill people for their own sake, because people are addicted in Chancery to more paper.

Let's have a paper on it. Um, he he's he's he's conscious.

He's concerned. Dickens is concerned about poverty.

About drainage, about cholera. And meanwhile, people are writing papers.

And he was a parliamentary reporter. He's just like, this is appalling.

These paper trails are creating a world that is not looking forwards.

It's not even looking backwards. It's looking inwards and inwards onto what it says.

Empty is the blank forms that this man is trading in. He's a stationary character.

He's a block. And you find this critique endlessly.

And also we have lists which create sort of spellbinding.

We also have chiasmus, which creates that sense of inward turning people who get too involved and people turning inwards.

And by the end of bleak House, a lot of characters seem to have completely lost their bearings in texts.

So Richard Casten, he's one of the plaintiffs in the jaundice.

And John's legal case is such a victim of paper, he's convinced that he will get to the bottom of the legal paperwork.

And he tells Esther, our heroine, I have looked well into the papers.

I have been deep in them for months. But it's interesting that as the novel progresses, Richard seems to be taking on an almost papery texture.

She describes some she noticed this is how dry his lips were.

The commentary upon it now indelibly written in his handsome face, as if he is becoming transforming into the text.

He's losing his his body. And Dickens isn't alone in the idea that paperwork could be a dangerously transformative force.

And obviously, there's an irony to this, because their novels, they're writing their novels on paper.

So you're like, how can you be honing its paper when you're writing novels?

But it's the sort of kind of novelists are doing it saying, don't read too much sensation fiction in novels,

but read mine because I'm self-conscious about the dangers, and therefore I'm telling you about the dangers of being, too.

It's sort of, um, it's.

Yeah, it's sort of strange, as if they're inoculating the readers against worse kinds of reading through being, uh, metafictional in this way.

Um, there's some quotations from Bratton which might be useful on the handouts.

Um, again, uh, where characters change, we tax and change hue.

They change from kind of flushed to chalky or grey or Latin.

And so it's really interesting if you look at descriptions of what happens to people when they read, when they read.

Well, when, when the writer is saying they're reading well, or they're reading Basie,

or they're reading problematic things that they see effects on the body of colours,

they seem to be changing, um, a sickly, chalky greyish white, a sickly Latin pallor.

On encountering a text. And, uh, Lady Audley Secret is intriguing because it plays with the idea of how paper can transform cells itself.

Because in the opening of Lady Audley Secret, a character actually changes her name by changing labels,

putting false things into the newspaper so people can be erased and recreated through paper.

We can see this kind of sense as a concern about the pressure of media upon the body.

Here's a painting by Millais. This is in a wonderful book by Garrett Stewart that I suggest you ask your college library to get,

because I think there are only two copies in Oxford. It is gorgeous. It contains numerous pictures of people reading, paintings of people reading.

It's called the look of reading and it's the idea of reverse process.

If. We have a poem about an art object.

But what about if we have an art object about a poem? And it goes right through from medieval times to much more recently, but it's reverse process.

And this is about Stuart. And so at this point is his where he's talking about the fact that this is, um,

this is a man who's returned from Crimea, and he says that it's really interesting that the newspaper print.

Seems to almost echo the lines of the chenille of the man's dressing gown, as if he's the sort of the pressure of the war.

And the news is sort of kind of having an osmotic quality of emanating in his body.

This idea of, um, you are what you read or you become what you read can trust is also in Joseph Clayton Clarke's 1900s cartoons.

So this is a series published in um, called You Are What You Read.

So this is what you are if you read the star.

This is what you all if you read the era. This is what you are.

If you read the Daily Mail, I find this was unbelievable that this is real.

But it is real. Uh. Um.

So, uh, on the handout, I've also, um, put a bit of trollop, uh,

where a character who's villainous because he is part of a scheme about paper shares about,

I mean, some of the concerns about paper thin or about people investing in things like railway schemes that went bust,

encouraging other people to invest in.

I mean, money itself is the ultimate sort of paper thin thing because it relies on gold and stocks and the so and so.

This villain has encouraged many people to invest.

They go bankrupt and he realises his time is up and he eats the paper, which I think is kind of before he kills stuff, he eats paper.

Uh, so for the final part of the lecture, um, I want to talk about one final sort of paper sorrow,

how individuality and feeling can survive, or if it can survive the machine of the paper industry.

And this idea, I think, is pressed home in the most papery character of all.

The office clerk. The copy clerk.

So the copy clerk exists in Dickens, in the figure of someone called Nemo, who is in bleak House.

He's central to the plot, and his identity is traced because of something distinctive to him his own hand.

So the question of the hand in novels is often seen as that mark which might seem to survive.

But, um. And the machine of bureaucracy.

But the sense of some individuality surviving.

I think we call it we can see it, this concern sort of evaporating,

the fact that the hand might disappear entirely through the late 19th century into the early 20th century.

And you can see this working through characters like, um, the typist in the wasteland that her hand has been almost that she is.

She's typing, but she is lost in the paper industry that just she's just the typist.

She's lost all her sense. And so either this term or next time,

you might read an essay called um by Walter Benjamin called The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction,

where he talks about the idea that if things get perpetually reproduced, we lose the work of art, loses its aura.

But also almost people lose their aura that there is nothing left.

So this is a copy clerk from P.G. Wodehouse novel Smith in the city.

If you're free tonight at 530. There's some good stuff being sung.

About five tickets left to come. Um, so here is, uh, a copy clerk.

You can see him on his desk, and there would have been rows and rows and rows of them.

You can see another copy clerk.

There's an amazing late 19th century book called The Diary of a nobody by Grace Weeden, Grace Smith, which is again, he's a copy clerk, a clerk.

You're just a machine. And as I said, typist in the Waste Land.

Um, but I'm going to look at one such clerk. And it's a story by James Joyce.

It was published after 1910, but it was completed in 1906.

So you could talk about it in this paper if you're clear on when it was completed.

Um, it's called counterparts. Uh, the the context of this story is that there's, um, and you probably do need the handouts.

At number. It's the final page of the handouts.

I'm not going to read this all but how it looks.

Sorry I haven't managed to turn that off, but hopefully it will stop ringing in a moment.

At least my WhatsApp isn't flashing up on the screen.

Um. No.

There's no way I can without leaping onto stage. I'm sure it'll stop soon.

Right. Counterparts. It's a story about a copy clerk.

He's an alcoholic. He wants to get paid early, to buy it, to get to the pub, to drink at lunchtime.

But it's not payday. So he wants to go to his boss to get some more money.

To get some alcohol. Um, his boss is called Mr. Allen, but his boss, Mr. Allen, wants something copied.

So the bell rang furiously. That's the sort of bell summoning the copy clerk.

And when Miss Parker went to the cheap, this sort of early telephone device in the office,

a furious voice called out in a piercing North Island accent.

Send Farrington here. So Farrington is a copy clerk.

She returned to her machine and she said to Farrington, Mr. Allen wants you upstairs.

Then this description of Farrington going to see Mr. Elaine, his boss, who is described by Joyce as a large egg reposing on the papers.

So it's like a kind of egg and paper. That's what this world is.

And as Farrington looks at his boss, sees a spasm of rage, grips his throat because he realises he's not going to get the money.

Therefore he's not going to get the alcohol. And then he returns to his desk and he starts copying again.

And the phrase in no case shed the shell was said Bernard, bodily be dot, dot, dot.

And thought how strange it was that the last three words began with the same letter.

And then he makes an error and he curses.

And he was so enraged that he wrote Bernard Bernard instead of Bernard bodily, and had to begin again on a clean sheet,

because in those days, obviously there's no photocopier and there's no you just have to write it.

Then the story goes on and he goes home. And so I'm going to jump forward to the end.

Franklin goes home and he says to his son, the little boy, what's for dinner?

I'm going to cook it part. So the little boy, the man jumped up furiously and pointed to the fire on that fire.

You let the fire out, by God. I'll teach you to do that again. He took a step to the door and sees the walking stick which was standing behind it.

I'll teach you to let the far out, he said, rolling up his sleeve in order to give his arm free play.

The little boy cried, and PA ran whimpering around the table, but the boy followed him and caught him by the throat.

Now you'll let the fire out next time, said the boy, striking at him vigorously with a stick.

Take that, you little well. The boy uttered a squeal of pain as the stick cut his thigh.

He crossed his hands together in the air, and his voice shook with fright.

Oh, poor, he cried. Don't beat me, PA. And I'll.

I'll say a Hail Mary for you. I'll say a Hail Mary for you.

PA, if you don't beat me, I'll say a Hail Mary.

I don't know if you've had sight of that on the handout, but if you haven't,

it's important for me to let you know that in that final bit where the boy is talking, he goes all.

And that's his hesitant guest doctor, I'll. I'll say a Hail Mary for you, doctor.

I'll say a Hail Mary for you. So the story had its own relationship with the print world.

Uh, Joyce's Dublin stories were consistently refused entry to publication because they were variously seen as shocking or too obscene,

um, or too negative about Ireland. But I want to think specifically about that title.

Counterparts. Counterparts of duplicates of documents.

Legal documents you make before a photocopier or printer.

You make one and then you make a copy. That's why people have copy clerks that human photocopy is.

But the counterpart also refers to the fact that the double's in the story the rage of the day.

Is echoed in the end that that one, that the rage in the morning spasm of rage is echoed as a counterpart with the rage Farrington towards his child.

One is the counterpart to the other. There's a sense of almost machine like reproduction working through human life,

and I just want to finally talk about counterpart at a print level, at the level of punctuation, the ellipsis.

Now ellipsis dots, they're funny things. They symbolise many things and they only exist in print.

Which is why I'm going dot, dot and waving my hands in this way.

Sometimes an ellipsis is unspeakable in a way of saying it's not worth saying dot, dot, dot.

You've got a quote and you just put dot, dot, dot because I don't worry about the middle. And that's what the first one is.

But bodily dot dot dot. And sometimes an ellipsis stands for something unbearable.

It's a signal for unbearable feeling. And in the story we see them functioning in either way.

These two ellipses, if you look at the story, the one in the copy room and the ones at the end of the story,

a type of graphically identical they are counterparts and their similarity is

threatening because the flatness of the paper world means we might easily overlook.

A threat. The similarity of those ellipses is threatening to, um, transform that final, unspeakable ellipsis,

that of the boys beating into the same realm as the bit that wasn't copied in the documents.

The unspeakable. Can become that which in a sea of mechanised print we overlook.

And Joyce, with these paper marks in this oh so papery story, is asking us to read between the lines.

To join the dots to try to get the feeling inside.

To get inside. The feeling that is being beaten out of the story.

And the little boy. Thank you.

